OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES 
 
 
 
FOR 
 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI RASHTRIYA KRISHI VIKAS YOJANA 
(PM-RKVY) 
 
 
 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers welfare 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
Government of India 
Krishi Bhawan, NewDelhi-110001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Contents 
 
Sl. No. 
Particulars 
Page no. 
1 
Introduction 
8 
2 
Objectives  
9-13 
3 
Eligibility criteria  
14 
4 
Interstate Allocation 
14 
5 
Cost norms and Pattern of assistance 
14 
6 
Nodal Department of PM-RKVY 
14-15 
7 
State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) 
15 
8 
Project Approval Committee (PAC) 
16 
9 
Planning and Sanctioning of schemes 
16-18 
10 
Release of funds 
18 
11 
Pradhan Mantri Janjatiya Unnat Gram Abhiyan 
19 
12 
Aspirational Districts and Vibrant Villages 
19 
13 
Timeline 
19 
14 
Implementation of PM- RKVY 
20 
A 
DPR Component 
20-22 
B 
AAP Component 
23 
I 
PDMC 
23-56 
II 
SMAM 
57-75 
III 
CRM 
76-87 
IV 
SH&F 
88-97 
V 
PKVY 
98-108 
VI 
RAD 
109-120 
VII 
Agro Forestry 
121-129 
VIII 
CDP 
130-135 
C 
Agri Startup and Accelerator Fund 
135 
15 
Administrative Expenses & Contingencies 
136 
16 
Monitoring & Evaluation 
136 
17 
Convergence 
137 
18 
Changes in  PM-RKVY  
137 
19 
Applicability of the guidelines 
137 
20 
Annexures: 
 

2 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Annexure I 
Format for submission of  Minutes of SLSC 
138 
Annexure II 
Details of activities/projects as approved by SLSC 
139-140 
Annexure III 
Form of Utilization Certificate 
141 
Annexure IV 
Inter State Allocation of the funds under RKVY-RAFTAAR 
142 
Annexure V 
Composition of State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) 
143 
Annexure VI 
Illustrative List Of Projects/Activities That Should Not Be 
Funded Under RKVY- DPR Component 
144 
Annexure VII 
Detailed Project Report 
145 
Annexure VIII 
Illustrative List of Projects that can be funded under RKVY-
RAFTAAR (Infrastructure & Assets) 
146-147 
Annexure IX 
Activities relating to Production stream under RKVY- DPR 
component 
148 
Annexure X 
Recommended norms for use of treated sewage quality for 
specific activities at point of use 
149 
Annexure XI 
Format for Annual Action Plan– Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) 
150-153 
Annexure XII a 
Format for Physical Progress Monitoring Report for Per Drop 
More Crop (Micro Irrigation) 
154 
Annexure XII b 
Format for Financial Progress Monitoring Report for Per Drop 
More Crop (Micro Irrigation) 
155 
Annexure XIII a 
Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities 0.2 ha 
156 
Annexure XIII b Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities 0.4 ha 
157 
Annexure XIII c 
Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities1.0 ha 
158 
Annexure XIII d Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities2.0 ha 
159 
Annexure XIII e 
Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities3.0 ha 
160 
Annexure XIII f 
Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities4.0 ha 
161 
Annexure XIII g Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities5.0 ha 
162 
Annexure XIII h NEH States -Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of 
Quantities0.2 ha 
163 
Annexure XIII i 
NEH States -Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of 
Quantities0.4 ha 
164 
Annexure XIII j 
NEH States -Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of 
Quantities 1.0 ha 
165 
Annexure XIII k NEH States -Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of 
Quantities 2.0 ha 
166 
Annexure XIII l 
NEH States -Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of 
Quantities 3.0 ha 
167 
Annexure XIII m NEH States -Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of 
Quantities 4.0ha 
168 
Annexure XIII n NEH States -Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of 
Quantities 5.0ha 
169 
Annexure XIV 
Indicative Bill of Quantities (BoQ) for Portable Sprinkler 
Irrigation System 
170 

3 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Annexure XV 
Indicative Bill of Quantities (BoQ) for Micro Sprinkler Irrigation 
System 
171 
Annexure XVI 
Indicative Bill of Quantities (BoQ) for Mini Sprinkler Irrigation 
System 
172 
Annexure XVII 
Indicative Bill of Quantities (BoQ) for Semi Permanent Sprinkler 
Irrigation System 
173 
Annexure XVIII Indicative Bill of Quantities (BoQ) for Rain-gun Sprinkler 
Irrigation System 
174 
Annexure XIX 
Water Quality Criteria In Relation To Clogging 
175 
Annexure XX 
Guidelines for Selection of Filter 
176 
Annexure XXI 
Indicative Price of Optional Components 
177 
Annexure XXII 
Other Interventions to be provided as optional, if and only if a 
farmer opted to install micro-irrigation System in his/her field 
178 
Annexure XXIII Gazette Notification 
179-182 
Annexure XXIV List of BIS Standards 
183-184 
Annexure-XXV 
Pattern of Assistance and Maximum Permissible Subsidy  
185-200 
Annexure-XXVI Procedure for Credit Linked Capital Subsidy  
201-202 
Annexure-XXVII 
 
List of Training Programmes conducted at the Farm Machinery 
Training & Testing Institutes 
203-205 
Annexure-XXVIII 
 
List of institutions approved by the Department for Testing and 
Certifying Agricultural Machineries and Equipments 
206-207 
Annexure-XXIX Pattern of Assistance and Maximum Permissible Subsidy for the 
Farmers for procurement of crop residue management machines 
on individual ownership basis 
208-209 
Annexure-XXX 
Pattern of Assistance and Maximum Permissible Subsidy per 
machine under the projects of Custom Hiring Centres 
210-211 
Annexure-XXXI Procedure for Credit Linked Capital Subsidy on the Custom 
Hiring Centres Projects and Paddy Straw Supply Chain Projects  
212-213 
Annexure-XXXII 
 
Indicative Capital Expenditure for Setting up Paddy Straw 
Supply Chain   
214-215 
Annexure-XXXIII Sample Bilateral Agreement  
216-229 
Annexure-XXXIV User manual for Mobile application 
230-280 
Annexure-XXXV Citizen Charter 
281-284 
Annexure- XXXVI Manual for Soil Health Card Portal 
285-328 
Annexure-XXXVII Guidelines for setting up of Village Level Soil Testing Labs 
329-338 
Annexure-
XXXVIII 
Illustrative list of equipment for setting up of Static Soil Testing 
Laboratory 
339 
Annexure-XXXIX Illustrative list of equipment for setting up of Mobile Soil Testing 
Laboratory 
340 
Annexure-XL 
Items and equipment for Strengthening of Static/ Mobile Soil 
Testing Laboratory 
341 
Annexure-XLI 
Illustrative list of Equipments for setting up of new State 
Fertilizer Testing Labs 
342 
Annexure-XLII 
Illustrative list of Equipments for Strengthening of existing State 
Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratory 
343 

4 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Annexure-XLIII 
List of Equipments and Plant and Machinery for Setting up New 
Bio-fertilizer and Organic Fertilizer (organic manures) Quality 
Control Laboratory 
344 
Annexure-XLIV Rain-fed Area Development (RAD) Cost Norms 
345 
Annexure-XLV 
Format for Annual Action Plan (AAP) of RAD 
346 
Annexure-XLVI Rainfed Area Development (RAD) Progress Reporting Format 
347 
Annexure-XLVII Functions of National/State/District Project Management Team 
(PMT) 
348 
Annexure-XLVIII Essential qualifications for Support Agency 
349 
Annexure-XLIX Roles and Responsibilities of Support Agency 
350 
Annexure-XLX 
Eligible Criteria for Regional Councils 
351 
Annexure-XLXI Roles and Responsibilities of Regional Councils as Agencies 
endorsing PGS Certification Process 
352 
Annexure-XLXII Roles and Responsibilities of Lead Resource Persons (LRPs) 
353 
Annexure-XLXIII Methodology for providing certification assistance to individual 
farmers/small farmer groups and large contiguous area under 
traditional/default organic farming 
354 
 
 

5 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Abbreviations 
AAP 
Annual action Plan 
AIBP 
Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme 
ATMA 
Agriculture Technology Management Agency 
BIS 
Bureau of Indian Standards 
BOQCL 
Bio-fertilizer and Organic Fertilizer (organic manures) Quality Control Laboratory 
CAFRI 
ICAR-Central Agroforestry Research Institute 
CDP 
Crop Diversification Programme 
CHC 
Custom Hiring Centre 
CIPET 
Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology 
CRM  
Crop Residue Management 
CSIR 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
CST 
Central Sales Tax 
DA&FW 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
DAPST 
Development Action Plan for Scheduled Tribes 
DBT  
Direct Benefit Transfer 
DIP 
District Irrigation Plan 
DLIC 
District Level Implementation Committee 
DoLR 
Department of Land Resources 
DONER  
Development of North Eastern Region  
DPR 
Detailed Project Report 
DRDA 
District Rural Development Agency 
EC 
Executive Committee  
EMD 
Earnest Money Deposit  
FMBs 
Farm Machinery Banks 
FMTTI 
Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institutes  
FPOs 
Farmer Producer Organizations  
FQCLs 
Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories 
FRA 
Forest Right Act 
GoI 
Government of India 
HDPE 
High Density Polyethylene 
HP  
Horse Power 
HRD 
Human Resource Development 
ICAR 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
ICAR. 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
ICFRE 
Indian Council of Forest Research & Education 
ICRAF 
International Centre for Research in Agroforestry 
ICT 
Information Communication Technology 
IDWG 
Inter Departmental Working Group 
IEC 
Information Education  and Communication 
IFS 
Integrated Farming System 

6 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
IMD 
Indian Meteorological Department 
INM 
Integrated Nutrient Management  
IPPE 
Intensive Participatory Planning Exercise 
ISRO 
Indian Space Research Organisation 
IT 
Information Technology 
IWMP 
Integrated Watershed Management Programme 
KCC  
Kisan Credit Card 
KVK 
Krishi Vigyan Kendra 
MGNREGA Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
Mha 
Million Hectare 
MI 
Micro Irrigation 
MIDH 
Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture 
MIS 
Micro Irrigation System/Management Information System 
MLALAD 
Member of Legislative Assembly Local Area Development 
MoA 
Ministry of Agriculture 
MoJS 
Ministry of Jal Shakti 
MoRD 
Ministry of Rural Development 
MPLAD 
Member of Parliament Local Area Development 
NABARD  
National Bank for Agriculture & Rural Development  
NABCONS NABARD Consultancy Services 
NAC 
National Advisory Committee  
NCONF 
National Centre of Organic and Natural Farming  
NCPAH 
National Committee on Precision Agriculture and Horticulture 
NEC 
National Executive Committee 
NEH 
North Eastern & Himalayan States 
NER 
North Eastern Region 
NFNSM 
National Food and Nutrition Security Mission etc 
NGO 
Non-Governmental Organisation 
NICRA 
National Initiative for Climate Resilient Agriculture  
NMEO-OS National Mission on Edible Oil-Oilseeds 
NMSA 
National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture 
NRAA 
National Rain-fed Area Authority 
NRM 
Natural Resource Management 
NSC 
National Stewardship Council 
PAC 
Project Approval Committee 
PDMC 
Per Drop More Crop 
PFMS 
Public Financial Management System 
PGS 
Participatory Guarantee System  
PKVY 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana 
PMJUGA 
Pradhan Mantri Janjatiya Unnat Gram Abhiyan 
PM-RKVY Pradhan Mantri Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana 
PMU 
Project Management Unit 

7 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
 
 
 
 
PPPAVCD Public- Private Partnership for Agriculture Value Chain Development 
PRIs 
Panchayati Raj Institutions 
PSU 
Public Sector Undertaking 
QPM 
Quality Planting Materials 
R&D 
Research & Development 
RAD 
Rainfed Area Development  
RKVY-MIS RKVY-Management Information System 
SAIDP 
State Agriculture Infrastructure Development Programme  
SAP 
State Agriculture Plan 
SAU 
State Agricultural Universities 
SH&F 
Soil Health and  Fertility 
SHC 
Soil Health Card 
SHGs 
Self Help Groups 
SHM 
Soil Health management 
SLEC 
State Level Executive Committee  
SLSC 
State Level Sanctioning Committee  
SMAE 
Sub Mission on Agricultural Extension  
SMAM 
Sub- Mission on Agriculture Mechanization 
STLs 
Soil Testing Laboratories  
UTs 
Union Territories 
VLSTLs 
Village Level Soil Testing Labs 

8 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
1. 
Introduction 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) was initiated in FY 2007-08 as an umbrella scheme 
for ensuring holistic development of agriculture and allied sectors by allowing States to choose 
their own agriculture and allied sector development activities as per the State Agriculture Plan. 
Till 2013-14, the scheme was implemented as an Additional Central Assistance(ACA) to State 
Plan Scheme with 100% central assistance. It was converted into a centrally sponsored scheme 
in 2014-15 with 100% central assistance. Later on, the funding pattern of the scheme was 
changed in 2015-16 and the ratio of central share and state share was fixed to 60:40 (except for 
NER States and Himalayan States where it has been kept as 90:10). For Union Territories the 
funding pattern is 100% central grant. 
 
 
Based on the recommendations of Expenditure Finance Committee and feedbacks received 
from States and NITI Aayog, RKVY has been restructured as a cafeteria scheme by merging 
the seven Central sponsored schemes and renamed as Prime Minister-Rashtriya Krishi 
Vikas Yojna (PM-RKVY) with the vision to enhance efficiency, efficacy and to avoid 
duplications, ensure convergence and provide flexibility in planning to the State Governments. 
 
The components of the PMRKVY are as follows: - 
i) 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
ii) 
Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) 
iii) 
Sub- Mission on Agriculture Mechanization (SMAM) including Management of 
Crop Residue (CRM) 
iv) 
Soil Health and Fertility (SH&F) 
v) 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojna (PKVY) 
vi) 
Rain Fed Area Development (RAD) 
vii) Agro- Forestry 
viii) Crop Diversification Programme (CDP) 
ix) 
Accelerated Fund for Agri Start-Up 
 
The restructured PM-RKVY will continue to be implemented as Centrally Sponsored Scheme. 
 
 

9 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
2. 
Objectives: 
 
The main objective of PM-RKVY scheme is to provide flexibility & autonomy to States for 
implementing projects as per the local and farmers’ needs and priorities in agriculture sector to 
enhance production and productivity for making farming as a remunerative economic 
activity.  
The scheme also aims to support and scale up the startups under innovation and 
entrepreneurship in various fields of agriculture and allied sectors to enhance income of farmers 
and to create employment opportunities for the youth. 
Specific objectives of the components under PM-RKVY are as follows: 
I. 
DPR: 
 To strengthen the farmers' efforts through creation of required pre & post-harvest in 
agriculture and allied sectors that help in supply of quality inputs, storage, market 
facilities, etc. to farmers.  
 To provide flexibility and autonomy to States to plan & implement projects as per the 
local and farmers needs and priorities from a bouquet of activities in agriculture and 
allied sectors.  
 To fill the resources, gap of agriculture and allied sectors by providing financial support 
to States for undertaking various activities to increase overall growth of agriculture and 
allied sectors and farmers’ income.  
 To promote agriculture and allied sectors activities of national priorities through 
specific initiatives as per the needs from time to time to mitigate specific problems to 
enhance production and productivity.  
II. PDMC: 
 To increase the area under Micro Irrigation technologies in agriculture to enhance water 
use efficiency. 
 To increase productivity of crops and income of farmers through precision water 
management. 
 Promote micro irrigation technologies in water intensive/consuming crops like 
sugarcane, banana, cotton, paddy etc. and give adequate focus to extend coverage of 
field crops under micro irrigation technologies. 

10 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
 To make potential use of micro irrigation systems for promoting fertigation. 
 To promote micro irrigation technologies in water scarce, water stressed and critical 
ground water blocks/districts &water intensive/consuming crops like sugarcane, 
banana, cotton, paddy etc.   
 To link tube-well/river-lift irrigation projects with micro irrigation technologies for best 
use of energy both for lifting and pressurized irrigation as far as possible. 
 To establish convergence and synergy with activities of on-going programmes and 
schemes, particularly with created water source for its potential use, integration of solar 
energy for pressurised irrigation etc. 
 To promote, develop and disseminate micro irrigation technology for agriculture and 
horticulture development with modern scientific knowledge 
 To support the initiatives of reuse of waste water in Agriculture/peri-urban Horticulture 
through micro irrigation systems. 
 To create employment opportunities for skilled and unskilled persons, especially 
unemployed youth for installation and maintenance of micro irrigation systems. 
III. SMAM: 
 To increase the reach of farm mechanization to small and marginal farmers and to the 
regions where availability of farm power is low; 
  To Promote Custom Hiring Services of agricultural machines to offset the adverse 
economies of scale arising due to small landholding and high cost of individual 
ownership; 
 To create awareness among stakeholders through demonstration, capacity building 
activities and differentiated Information, Education and Communication strategies; 
 To ensure performance testing and certification at designated testing centers located all 
over the country; 
(a) CRM: 
 
 To protect environment from air pollution and preventing loss of nutrients and soil 
micro-organisms caused by burning of crop residue; 

11 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
 To promote management of crop residue by retention/incorporation into the soil and 
establishing appropriate supply chain for further utilization through the deployment of 
appropriate mechanization inputs; 
 To create awareness among stakeholders through demonstration, capacity building 
activities and differentiated Information, Education and Communication strategies for 
effective utilization and management of crop residue. 
IV. 
SH&F: 
 To issue need based Soil Health Cards to the farmers in the country, so as to provide a 
basis to address nutrient deficiencies in fertilization practices. 
 To strengthen functioning of Soil Testing Laboratories (STLs) through capacity 
building, involvement of agriculture students and effective linkage with Indian Council 
of Agricultural Research (ICAR)/State Agricultural Universities (SAUs). 
 To diagnose soil fertility related constraints with standardized procedures for sampling 
uniformly across states and analysis and design taluka/block level fertilizer 
recommendations in targeted districts. 
 To develop and promote soil test based nutrient management in the districts for 
enhancing nutrient use efficiency and build capacities of progressive farmer for 
promotion of nutrient management practices. 
 To ensure quality control requirements of fertilizers, bio-fertilizers and organic 
fertilizers under the Fertilizer (Control) Order (FCO), 1985, including revision of 
standards and testing protocols keeping in view the advances in research and 
technology and covering organic inputs under quality control regime. 
 To promote Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) through judicious use of chemical 
fertilizers, including secondary and micronutrients, in conjunction with organic 
manures and bio-fertilizers, for improving soil health and its productivity. 
 To support augmentation and strengthening of soil and fertilizer testing facilities 
 To provide support to School Soil Health Programme 
 To provide support to RAWE Programme for Agriculture Graduates 
V. PKVY: 
 To promote natural resource based integrated and climate resilient sustainable farming 
systems that ensure maintenance and increase of soil fertility, natural resource 
conservation, on-farm nutrient recycling and minimize dependence of farmers on 
external inputs;  

12 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
 To reduce cost of agriculture to farmers through sustainable integrated organic farming 
systems thereby enhancing farmer’s net income per unit of land  
 To sustainably produce chemical free and nutritious food for human consumption. 
 To protect environment from hazardous inorganic chemicals by adoption of ecofriendly 
low cost traditional techniques and farmer friendly technologies 
 To empower farmers through their own institutional development in the form of clusters 
and groups with capacity to manage production, processing, value addition and 
certification management;  
 To make farmers entrepreneurs through direct market linkages with local and national 
markets 
VI. RAD: 
 To undertake location specific and landscape-based approach to dry-land areas to 
ensure natural resources conservation and sustainable use, strengthening of agriculture 
production systems and livelihood development through integration/convergence of 
schemes in an area based approach. 
 To make agriculture more productive, sustainable, remunerative and climate resilient 
by promoting location specific Integrated/Composite Farming Systems; 
 To conserve natural resources through appropriate soil and moisture conservation 
measures; 
 To develop capacity of farmers and stakeholders in conjunction with other ongoing 
Missions such as National Food and Nutrition Security Mission, National Initiative for 
Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) etc., in the domain of climate change adaptation 
measures; 
 To improve the productivity of rainfed farming by mainstreaming rainfed technologies 
refined under All India Coordinated Research Project on Dry land Agriculture 
(AICRPDA-NICRA) and by leveraging resources/provisions made under other Govt 
Schemes. 
 

13 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
VII. Agro Forestry: 
 To encourage and expand tree plantation in a complementary and integrated manner 
with crops to improve productivity, additional income generation and improved 
livelihoods of rural households, especially the small farmers.  
 To ensure the availability of Quality Planting Materials (QPM) like seeds, seedlings, 
clones, hybrids, improved varieties, etc. Quality Planting Material (QPM) of healthy, 
resilient and adaptable nursery stock raised through seed or vegetative propagation 
with an overall goal to improve the quality of the plants available to farmers and 
growers. 
 To popularize various agroforestry practices/models suitable to different agro-
ecological regions and land use conditions through demonstration plots.  
 To create a database, information and knowledge support in the area of agroforestry & 
to provide Research & Development (R&D), extension and capacity-building support 
to the agroforestry sector.  
 To identify and catalyze linkages with traditional and emerging markets for the timber 
and non-timber products generated from agroforestry plantation on farmland including 
Bio-fuels, matchwood, plywood, silk, fiber, lac, beauty and wellness sector, 
handicrafts, construction, etc.  
 To promote value addition and processing of agroforestry produce by creating 2 3-
1/2021-NRM-SMAF I/25439/2023 collection and post-harvest facilities for additional 
income generation by farmers.  
 To provide use of modern technology for monitoring and evaluation (M&E) on the 
impact of agroforestry in agro-ecology. 
 
VIII. CDP: 
 To demonstrate and promote the improved production technologies of alternate crops 
for diversion of paddy cultivation; 
 To restore the soil fertility through cultivation of leguminous crops that generates, heavy 
biomass and consume lesser nutrient intake crops. 
 

14 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
3. 
Eligibility Criteria: 
PM-RKVY being a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, all States & UTs will be eligible for funding 
under PM-RKVY. 
4. 
Inter-state allocation: 
 
Criteria for interstate allocation is given under the programme components at Annexure IV 
5. 
Cost Norm & Pattern of Assistance: 
The cost norms and pattern of assistance applicable for DPR and each of the AAP components 
of PM-RKVY is elaborated in details in para 13 of this guideline. The funding pattern of the 
schemes will be in the ratio of 60:40 between centre and state except of 90:10 for NER states 
and Himalayan states. For UTs the funding pattern will be 100% central grant. 
 
6. 
Nodal Department   for PM-RKVY: 
Agriculture Department of the States/UTs shall be the nodal department and   Principal 
Secretary Agriculture/ACS Agriculture / Agriculture Production Commissioner will be the 
nodal officer for implementation of the PM-RKVY scheme. For administrative convenience 
and ease of implementation, State      Governments      may identify   or create an exclusive 
agency for implementing the scheme on a fast-track basis. Even where such an Agency is 
created/designated, the entire responsibility of ensuring proper implementation of each 
components of PM-RKVY scheme rests with the Agriculture Department of the State. In a 
situation where the States notify a Nodal Agency, the costs of running the agency, will have to 
be met by them from within the 2.5% limit of allocation available under PM-RKVY for 
administrative expenditure. States may supplement any administrative expenditure in excess of 
the 2.5% limit, from their own resources. 
 
The Agriculture Department / nodal agency will be also responsible for the following: 
 
Effective coordination, preparation and appraisal of projects, implementing, monitoring 
and evaluation with various Departments and implementing Agencies. 
 
Management of funds received from the Central Government and State Government and 
its disbursement to the implementing agencies. 
 
Furnishing of utilization certificates (including uploading UCs in PFMS) and reporting 

15 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
monthly/ quarterly physical & financial progress to the Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare. 
 
To update the web enabled IT based Management Information System of various 
components of PM-RKVY regularly 
7. 
State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC): 
A State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) headed by the Chief Secretary of the concerned 
State/UT will recommend and submit the consolidated Annual Action Plan (AAP) under each 
component (both DPR and AAP) of PM-RKVY to Government of India (GoI). The 
composition of SLSC is at Annexure V 
SLSC   should meet twice a year or as and when required to review the implementation of the 
scheme. 
Roles and Responsibilities of SLSC 
 
To prepare and submit proposals to GoI as per approved guidelines and cost norms 
of the respective schemes up to a maximum of 125% of the amount allocated to the 
State under PM-RKVY in the prescribed format given at Annexure I. 
 
In case of projects having implementation period spanning more than one financial 
year, year-wise phasing of expenditure along with targets/milestones shall be 
specifically mentioned in the minutes of the SLSC meetings.  
 
To implement the sanctioned projects under PMRKVY as per the guidelines.  
 
To ensure that all extant procedures and instructions of the GoI are followed so that 
the expenditure incurred on implementation of the projects is the barest minimum 
with due concern for economy in expenditure and also in conformity with the 
canons of financial propriety, transparency and probity. 
 
To ensure that adequate coverage of small and marginal farmers, Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes, Patta holders under FRA act, women and other weaker segments 
of society is to be given while selecting beneficiaries under any components of 
RKVY so that the benefits of implementation of a particular component of the 
scheme is received by the intended beneficiaries in accordance with guidelines and 
policies of the Government. 

16 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
8. 
Project Approval Committee (PAC): 
There will be a PAC under the Chairmanship of Secretary, DA&FW, Government of 
India consisting of Divisional Heads of the Department and other senior Officers to 
examine, deliberate and approve the AAP submitted by the States under PM-RKVY. 
The composition of the PAC is as follows: 
S. No. 
Designation 
 
1 
Secretary, Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare 
Chairman 
2 
Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Member 
3 
Additional Secretary, DA&FW 
Member 
4 
Joint Secretary (RKVY) 
Member 
5 
Joint Secretary (PDMC) 
Member 
6 
Joint Secretary (RAD/Agro Forestry) 
Member 
7 
Joint Secretary (M&T) 
Member 
8 
Joint Secretary (INM) 
Member 
9 
Joint Secretary (Crops) 
Member 
10 
Joint Secretary (MIDH) 
Member 
11 
Joint Secretary (Seeds) 
Member 
12 
Agriculture Commissioner 
Member 
13 
Horticulture Commissioner 
Member 
14 
Joint Secretary (PC) 
Member Secretary 
9. 
Planning & Sanctioning of Schemes: 
 
The extant process of formulation and approval of DPR and AAP components of PM-RKVY 
will be as follows: 
i) 
A tentative interstate allocation of funds will be communicated to the State 
Governments for DPR & AAP component of PM-RKVY.  
 
ii) 
A consolidated component-wise project proposal i.e. AAP/DPR shall be prepared 

17 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
in the prescribed format incorporating all essential details like feasibility studies, 
competencies of the implementing agencies, outputs/outcomes framework, time-
lines for implementation etc.  
 
iii) 
Agriculture Department / Nodal department at state level will propose projects up   
to a maximum of 125% of the amount allocated to the state. 
 
iv) 
 Consolidated AAP should clearly indicate the year- wise physical & financial 
targets proposed under each project. 
 
v) 
A meeting of SLSC will be convened to scrutinize /examine the projects proposed 
by Nodal Department and submit the consolidated AAP for approval by GoI. 
 
vi) 
There will be flexibility to States for re-apportion of up to 50% of allocation for 
the component from one AAP component to another AAP component of RKVY.  
However, re-apportion of the allocation from AAP component to DPR component 
or vice versa is not permissible. 
 
vii) 
In case one or more AAP components is not feasible to be implemented in a State 
due to low demand or some specific reasons, they may be allowed to transfer 
funds allocated for that component to another component of their choice after 
taking due approval of SLSC. 
 
viii) RKVY Division, at the end of financial year, will reconcile the component wise 
expenditure with the approved outlay and necessary adjustments will be done 
while making interstate allocation in subsequent years. 
 
ix) 
The nodal department of the States shall ensure that PM-RKVY projects/activities 
should not create duplication or overlapping of assistance/area coverage vis-à-vis 
other scheme/programmes of State/Central Government. 
 
x) 
A presentation of all AAP & DPR components of PM- RKVY will be made by 
the State Agriculture Secretary to Project Approval Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, DA&FW. GoI will convey the approval of the 
consolidated AAP along with specific comments for each of the projects to the 
state. 
 
xi) 
SLSC/State will ensure that no project shall be undertaken for implementation if 
GOI has not supported the project during AAP meeting. 
 
xii) 
 Further, if any new project(s) is deemed important for implementation under PM-
RKVY by the State during the FY, the Nodal Department may send the DPR of 
the project(s) to GoI with the consent of SLSC. After detailed examination and 
deliberations of the projects by the respective divisions, GoI will convey the 

18 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
approval of the AAP to the states. The projects have to be undertaken within the 
approved allocation of the state. 
 
xiii) States will be allowed to utilize fund available in PM- RKVY scheme for any 
component as an interim measure to ensure that activities of the particular 
component of the scheme is not affected for want of funds. However, the activity 
for which the fund released under various components should be completed 
without any exception by the States subsequently by replenishing the appropriate 
amount in respective components. 
 
10. Release of Funds: 
 
PM-RKVY scheme funds will be released to the States/UTs subject to compliance of 
conditions prescribed by Department of Expenditure, Govt. of India & fulfillment of the 
following conditions: 
 
 Submission of 100% Utilization Certificates (UCs) of the funds released up to the 
previous financial year; 
 Submission of physical and financial progress report in the specified format.  
 
The format for submitting Utilization Certificate is given at Annexure III 
If a State fails to avail their full allocation, the balance funds may be re-allocated to better 
performing States. 
The Nodal Agency/Nodal Department of the State/UT shall ensure that component-wise as 
well as project-wise accounts are maintained by the Implementing Agencies and are subjected 
to the normal process of statutory audit. 
An inventory of the assets created under PM-RKVY projects should be carefully maintained 
and assets that are no longer required should be transferred to the Nodal Department, for its 
use and re-deployment wherever possible. Nodal Agency/Department of the States/UTs should 
ensure that the Central Assistance released under the scheme is utilized in accordance with the 
approved AAP. 
All implementing agencies are required to maintain subsidiary accounts of the grants-in-aid 
and get the same audited from a Chartered Accountant. 
Grants in aid will be released as per provisions regarding release of funds contained in GFR 
2017 and instruction issued in this regard by Government of India from time to time 

19 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
11. 
Pradhan Mantri Janjatiya Unnat Gram Abhiyan : 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs has launched Pradhan Mantri Janjatiya Unnat Gram Abhiyan 
(PMJUGA) with an aim to improve the socio-economic condition of the tribal communities by 
adopting saturation coverage for tribal families in tribal-majority villages and Aspirational 
Districts. The Mission will cover approximately 63000 villages viz. (i)Villages with population 
of 500 or more and with at least 50% Scheduled Tribe population and (ii)Villages in 
Aspirational Districts with 50 or more Scheduled Tribes. Dovetailing schemes and beneficiary 
identification (FRA Patta Holders) is to be undertaken effectively while implementing schemes 
so as to achieve the Mission objectives.  
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, has been included as one of the priority sector 
for the Mission. The financial assistance to these FRA patta holders would be provided from 
Development Action Plan for Scheduled Tribes (DAPST) Funds. While implementing PM-
RKVY scheme, priority should be given to such villages identified for PMJUGA and inclusion 
of FRA patta holders should be ensured while selecting beneficiaries. However, the 
beneficiary share in respect of patta holders under FRA act will be 10% only in each of 
the components of PM-RKVY 
 
12. 
Aspirational Districts and Vibrant Villages: 
While implementing the PM-RKVY scheme, priority should be given to Aspirational Districts 
and Vibrant Villages identified by the Government.  States should ensure that these 
Aspirational Districts and Vibrant Villages, if falling in their States, should necessarily be 
included in the State Annual Action Plan so that more beneficiaries falling in the Aspirational 
Districts and Vibrant villages are covered under the Scheme 
 
13. 
Timelines: 
As far as possible, the following timeline will be adhered to by the Centre and States. 
Communication of allocation to States by GoI 
By 30th November 
AAP submission by the States with the approval of 
SLSC 
By 31st December 
Presentation of AAP/DPR by States to PAC, DA&FWJanuary- February 
Communication of GoI approval to States 
By 30th March 
Issuance of Mother Sanction/ Release of funds 
First week of April 
 

20 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
14. 
Implementation of Programme Components under PMRKVY 
 
The restructured PM-RKVY scheme has following components:  
A. DPR based component. 
B. Annual Action Plan (AAP)component. 
C. Start-up & Accelerated Fund component. 
 
A. DPR Based Component: 
This component will be implemented in a project-based mode.  States/UTs will have the 
flexibility with the option of proposing projects related to agriculture and allied sectors 
(excluding Animal Husbandry and Fisheries) for creation of infrastructure, production 
growth, innovative projects etc. States may also take up projects under the scheme in 
Public- Private Partnership for Agriculture Value Chain Development (PPPAVCD) mode that 
provide additional income to farmers. A revised framework for implementing projects 
under PPPVCD framework has been issued separately by DA & FW.  
A maximum of 30% of total outlay will be earmarked for Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
component including Administrative charges and Startup component. In case of NER & 
Himalayan states i.e. Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh & UTs, the ceiling will be 
maximum 50 % of the total outlay. 
Inter State Allocation of Funds: 
 
The quantum of assistance (or fund allocation) to the States will be in accordance with the 
parameters and respective weights as explained in Annexure-IV 
 
Cost Norms: 
DPR is a gap filling scheme wherein projects related to agriculture and other sectors for 
creation of infrastructure and innovative projects that do not fit into the template of existing 
schemes of DA&FW are to be proposed by the States. 
Activities proposed under RKVY-DPR like creation of infrastructure and value addition linked 
production are generally covered under various ongoing schemes/programmes of Central 
Government viz. Deptt. of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Deptt. of Land Resources, 
Ministry of Water Resources, Ministry of Food Processing Industries, Ministry of New & 
Renewable Energy, Ministry of Rural Development etc. 

21 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
 
 Technical requirements/standards and financial norms (cost norms and pattern of 
assistance) etc. specified for these schemes will also be applicable for RKVY-DPR. 
 In the absence of such criterion in respect of any component in Central Plan Scheme, norms 
and conditions prescribed by respective State Governments for their schemes may be 
applied. 
 In cases where no Central / State Govt. norms are available, a certificate of reasonableness 
of the proposed project will in variably be given by SLSC. 
 
 
For infrastructure and assets projects, 100% assistance will be provided if these are to be 
executed by public sector through PPPAVCD mode. In case of projects taken by Private 
sector under PPPAVCD, the assistance will be 50% &25% for infrastructure projects and 
production oriented projects respectively. States may refrain from undertaking 
activities/components as illustrated in Annexure-VI under RKVY–DPR component. 
 
Preparation of DPR: 
 
DPR component of PM-RKVY will be implemented as a project-based scheme. Thus, DPRs 
shall have to be prepared and submitted by the states in the format given at Annexure VII 
incorporating all essential details i.e. feasibility studies, competencies of the implementing 
agencies, anticipated benefits (outputs/outcomes) that will flow to the farmers/ State, definite 
time-lines for implementation etc. 
In case of large projects costing more than Rs. 25 crore, DPRs should be subjected to third 
party ‘techno-financial evaluation’ and circulated well in advance to concerned Central 
Ministries for obtaining comments/observations. 
DPRs for all projects should certify that there would be no duplication of funding and/or taking 
up similar activities as in other Plan schemes of Central/State Government. The projects under 
DPR should be prepared for the following: 
 
i Creation of Infrastructure and Assets: States can establish pre and post-harvest 
infrastructure in agriculture and allied sectors under DPR component of RKVY. Projects 
will preferably emanate from State Agriculture Plan (SAP) or State Agriculture 
Infrastructure Development Programme (SAIDP) that States prepare for the Finance 

22 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Commission. 
 
  The Asset Building activity consists of creation of various assets like tissue culture labs, 
cold storage facilities, infrastructure for sorting, grading, vermin compost units, labs for 
production of bio control agents, soil testing labs, etc. The illustrative List of Projects that 
can be funded under DPR component of RKVY (Infrastructure &Assets) is given at   
Annexure VIII 
 
While a number of infrastructure items are covered under Rural Infrastructure 
Development Fund (RIDF) and Viability Gap Funding (VGF) of the Ministry of Finance, 
DPR funds should supplement those sources and not replace them. In any case, quantum 
of assistance under RKVY should not exceed assistance under VGF. Recurring 
expenditure to the extent of human resources requirement on contractual basis and 
chemical components to run the testing labs will be allowed under the ceiling of 2.5% 
administrative expenditure 
 
 
ii Production growth: Under this, states can take up innovative projects that take care from 
production to marketing of any agriculture sector activities. An illustrative list of activities 
which may be taken up under DPR component for production growth is given at Annexure 
IX 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
B. Annual Action Plan (AAP) component: 
 
AAP component will comprise of seven schemes i.e SH&F, PKVY, RAD, PDMC, SMAM 
including CRM, Agro-forestry and CDP. A minimum of 70% will be allocated for Annual 
Action Plan (AAP) component including Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation purposes.  
In case of NER & Himalayan states i.e Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh & UTs, the ceiling will 
be minimum of 50 % of the total outlay. 
Detailed guidelines for implementation of these sub components are as follows. 
 
B.1 
Per Drop More Crop: 
Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) focuses on enhancing water use efficiency at farm level through 
Micro Irrigation viz. Drip and Sprinkler irrigation systems. 
 
B.1.1 Salient Features: 
i. 
Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme implemented by the 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) from the year 2015-16 to 
promote micro irrigation in the Country to benefit the farmer community. As a part of 
the restructuring/rationalization of the schemes of DA&FW, PDMC Scheme is being 
implemented under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) from the year 2022-23. 
ii. 
District Irrigation Plans (DIP) is the cornerstone for planning and implementation of 
PDMC which identifies gaps in irrigation chain after taking into consideration 
currently available resources and resources that would be added from ongoing 
schemes, both State and Central. 
iii. 
The Annual Action plans is to be drawn from District Irrigation Plans. 
iv. 
State irrigation plan focuses on cluster based approach and integrated development of 
different components in the irrigation chain. 
v. 
The scheme is to be implemented through the mechanism of Direct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT). Aadhaar details of the beneficiary are required to avail the benefit of the 
programme. Aadhaar details need to be linked through a web based registration 
process. States/UTs should ensure disbursement of subsidy in a time bound manner. 
vi. 
The scheme will be monitored through web-portal of PDMC. Physical and Financial 
progress achieved during the preceding month is required to be up- loaded by states 

24 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
on the web-portal of PDMC. 
vii. 
More focus be given on promotion of micro irrigation in rainfed areas and also for 
water intensive/guzzling crops to minimize water requirement. 
viii. 
The pattern of assistance payable to the beneficiary under the micro irrigation scheme 
will be 55% for small and marginal farmers and 45% for other farmers.  
ix. 
The subsidy payable to the beneficiary will be limited to an overall ceiling of 5 hectare 
per beneficiary. Those beneficiaries, who have already availed subsidy benefits for his 
/her farm, would be eligible for subsidy again for the same land only after the end of 
projected life of the micro irrigation system which is 7 years. 
x. 
The subsidy payment will be limited to the unit costs specified in the Operational 
Guidelines of the scheme. 25% higher amounts will be taken into calculation of 
subsidy for the North Eastern, Himalayan States and UTs of JK & Ladakh and 15% 
higher for States with low penetration of Micro Irrigation. 
xi. 
Only BIS marked systems/components can be supplied under the scheme. 
xii. 
The registration of manufacturers/companies under the scheme will be for a period of 
5 years. The registration will be open round the year. The registration will, however, 
be subject to satisfactory performance by the company. In case of violations, penalty 
provisions have been specified in the guidelines. Repeated failures will lead to de-
registration of the company with the approval of SLSC. 
xiii. 
The company will provide free service after sales to the beneficiary for a period of at 
least three years from the date of installation of the system. If it fails to provide free 
after sales service, action as appropriate similar to other consumer products may be 
initiated. 
xiv. 
In case the company intends to supply imported components, it shall be eligible for 
subsidy under the scheme subject to indigenization of manufacturing of the component 
within the country in a period of two years. 
xv. 
Human resource development is an important component of the scheme and suitable 
provisions have been made in the guidelines for creating awareness, organizing 
training programs, Skill development and exposure visits etc. 
 
 

25 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
B.1.2 Institutional Architecture 
Per Drop More Crop will have the following institutional structure. 
National Stewardship Council (NSC): National Stewardship Council(NSC)under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (DA&FW) with the following members will be constituted to 
provide strategic direction for guidance and planning for effective implementation of the 
scheme; 
S. No. 
Designation 
 
1 
Secretary, Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare 
Chairman 
2 
Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Member 
3 
Additional Secretary, DA&FW 
Member 
4 
Representative from Ministry of Water 
Resources 
Member 
5 
Representative 
from 
Ministry 
of 
Rural 
Development 
Member 
6 
Representative 
from 
Department 
of 
Agricultural Research & Education  
Member 
7 
Representative from Department of Land 
Resources 
Member 
8 
Joint Secretary (INM) 
Member 
9 
Joint Secretary (Crops) 
Member 
10 
Joint Secretary (RKVY) 
Member 
11 
Technical Expert of National Rainfed Area 
Authority (NRAA) 
Member 
12 
Director, Water Technology Center (WTC), 
ICAR 
Member 
13 
Horticulture Commissioner 
Member 
14 
Joint Secretary (NRM & RFS) 
Member Secretary 
Representative from three State Implementing Departments/Agencies; One representative from 
Precision Farming Development Centres (PFDC); One Micro Irrigation System 
Manufacturer/Industry; President/Representative of the Irrigation Association of India(IAI) 
and representative from two FPOs/farmers’ cooperatives may be invited as special invitees. 
Inter Departmental Working Group (IDWG): At the State level, under the Chairmanship 

26 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
of Agriculture Production Commissioner/ Development Commissioner with Secretaries of line 
departments as members will be constituted to coordinate the planning and implementation of 
the scheme. States may take the advice/input of MI manufacturers by inviting representative 
from manufacturers/Micro Irrigation Industries /Irrigation Association of India (IAI) as special 
invitee in such Committees. 
District Level Implementation Committee (DLIC): Under the Chairmanship of 
Collector/District Magistrate/CEO of Zila Parishad/ PD DRDA, Joint Director/Deputy Director 
of line departments in the district and progressive farmers, representative of MI industry, and 
leading NGO as members to oversee implementation of the scheme and inter-departmental 
coordination 
B.1.3 District and State Irrigation Plans (DIPs & SIPs): 
District Irrigation Plans (DIPs) are the cornerstone for planning and implementation of 
different schemes related to irrigation which will identify gaps in irrigation infrastructure after 
taking into consideration the District Agriculture Plans (DAPs) vis-à-vis irrigation 
infrastructure currently available and resources that would be added from ongoing schemes, 
both State and Central. 
 
DIPs present holistic irrigation development perspective of the district outlining medium to 
long term development plans integrating three components viz. water sources, distribution 
network and water use applications. 
 
The annual action plans for Per Drop More Crop will be drawn from DIPs and implemented 
in conjunction with the water sources created under convergence with other State/Central 
schemes. 
Strategies:- 
i. 
Priority should be given for promoting micro irrigation technologies in rainfed areas. 
More focus should be given to water scarce, water stressed and critical ground water 
blocks/districts to conserve water and get extended coverage in terms of area and time 
period for life saving irrigation. 
ii. 
It is desirable to make potential use of the available water for sustained growth in 
agriculture sector. Preference should be given to adopt Micro Irrigation technology in 
water guzzling crops like sugarcane, cotton, banana etc. and the state implementing 
agencies should take suitable steps like publicity campaigns, policy provisions & 

27 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
sharing responsibilities with the Micro Irrigation industry so that adoption of 
technology is initiated in such crops. Industry related to the specific crops like sugar 
factories should be actively involved in promotion of micro irrigation to their farmers 
through incentivisation and technical supervision. Apart from horticulture and water 
guzzling crops, cereals and pulses may also be brought under the ambit of Micro 
irrigation. 
iii. 
In all the new irrigation commands where hydraulic heads are available, drip irrigation 
systems need to be encouraged as it can be operated without additional energy support. 
iv. 
Facilities of micro irrigation is under utilized if it is not used for fertigation. States 
should encourage the use of liquid fertilizers using micro irrigation systems. 
Availability of liquid fertilisers, awareness among farmers on the benefits of fertigation 
need to be given desired attention for promoting fertigation. 
v. 
Efforts may be made for integration of micro irrigation with solar pumping units. A 
solar water pump has a mini power house at its heart and consists of a calibrated and 
matching solar array of modules – tuned with the equivalent power of pump for that 
particular application. The solar water pumping system is capable of running all types 
of electrical water pumps with applications varying from irrigation to household 
demands. Irrigation pumps such as submersible, surface or deep well can also be 
coupled with drip irrigation systems to enhance the returns from this configuration. A 
2000 Watt Peak (WP) solar water pump is capable of drawing and pumping 
approximately 80,000 litres of water per day from a source that is up to 10 meters deep. 
This is sufficient to irrigate about 1 ha of land with regular crops. 
vi. 
The    available    water    sources    or    the    new     sources     those     are being 
created need to be used in best possible manner to fulfil the vision of “Har Khet Ko 
Pani” through efficient water conservation (Jal Sanchaya) and water management (Jal 
Sinchan) practices. It is, in this context, more vital to link most of the water sources 
with micro irrigation to get extended coverage for a longer duration. 
vii. 
PDMC focuses on micro irrigation for enhancing water use efficiency. States may take   
up    sources    creation    activities    as    Other    Interventions (OI) under the scheme 
and must be linked with Micro Irrigation to make potential use of the available funds 
for higher water use efficiency. These activities should be based on actual requirement 
and as per the needs of the farmer who adopts the Micro irrigation system. 
viii. 
The amount for OI activities must be restricted to 20% of the total allocation for 
States/UTs and 40% for North East States, Himalayan States & UTs of Jammu Kashmir 

28 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
and Ladakh. 
ix. 
Assistance for installation of micro irrigation system is limited to five hectares per 
beneficiary. The land holding of a beneficiary to be covered under drip/sprinkler system 
could be located in one contiguous area or at different locations, but the financial 
assistance will be limited to the overall ceiling of five ha. 
x. 
Those beneficiaries, who have already availed subsidy benefits for his /her farm, can 
not avail the assistance for the next seven years. A beneficiary if availed the benefit of 
subsidy for micro irrigation for a particular farm would be eligible for subsidy again 
for the same land only after the end of projected life of the micro irrigation system 
which is seven years. However, the beneficiary may be allowed to avail effective 
differential subsidy in case he intends to install Drip Irrigation System on the same 
plot/field from the existing Sprinkler Irrigation System at least after three years to 
promote crop diversification irrespective of seven years subsidy cycle. 
xi. 
The unit cost/BoQs of the MI systems given in the Guidelines are indicative. The 
beneficiary will be allowed to opt to make his choice for items/components etc. In case 
any deviation from the BoQ, the differential cost shall be borne by the beneficiary 
subject to ceiling of unit cost. 
xii. 
Sometimes beneficiaries may not be able to contribute the requisite amount to adopt 
micro irrigation technologies. States/UTs may involve financial institutions like 
NBFC/Bank/NABARD to fill the upfront credit gap faced by the farmers for micro-
irrigation adoption. States may facilitate credit facility to farmers (such as enabling 
subsidy component as State guarantee). 
xiii. 
In view of the continuous modernization of agriculture resulting into evolving ways to 
improve productivity and sustainability, crops spacings keeps on changing. Financial 
assistance for installation of Micro irrigation systems will be based the indicative cost 
of MI systems for different spacings and plot sizes provided in the guidelines. In case 
of crops with plant spacing other than those mentioned in the Guidelines, the amount 
of assistance could be calculated on pro rata/average basis of the nearest plant area. 
xiv. 
Beneficiaries/Institutions that have opted for contract farming or taken land on lease 
are also eligible for obtaining financial assistance under the scheme. However, to 
become eligible, the beneficiary/institution shall have to produce lease agreement for a 
minimum period of 7 years from the date of approval of application by the MI 
implementing agency. 
xv. 
ICAR, PFDCs, CIPET, ATMA etc. may be involved in planning, implementation, 

29 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
demonstration, training and evaluation under the scheme. The implementing agency at 
the district level will ensure convergence of activities under the programme with the 
activities of various departments on water management to get the desired output. 
xvi. 
Raw material price of polymers &other costs varies a lot because of fluctuation in 
national/international prices. Accordingly, periodic review of pricing may be carried 
out by the DA&FW, GoI. 
xvii. 
States must include all Aspirational Districts identified by NITI Aayog in their Annual 
Action Plan (AAP)for coverage of Micro Irrigation under the Scheme in these Districts. 
Further, priority may be given to Namami Gange Districts/Gram Panchayats (GPs) 
along the stretch of river Ganga basin to be included in AAP for Micro Irrigation 
coverage. 
xviii. 
Climate Change is known to have adverse impact on agriculture. Irrigation has been an 
effective tool in addressing climatic aberrations like drought, heat wave causing that is 
responsible for enormous loss to agriculture. States/UTs must ensure coverage of MI 
in dark zones and climatically vulnerable areas. The MI coverage should also be given 
priority to the areas under NICRA program of ICAR- CRIDA to promote climate 
resilient technologies. 
xix. 
Micro Irrigation is an important component of various Centrally Sponsored Schemes, 
such as, National Mission of Edible Oils – Oilseeds (NMEO-OS), MIDH, NFSM, 
NMEO-OP. States/UTs should ensure that installation of Micro Irrigations systems 
under these schemes be dovetailed with PDMC. The Annual Action Plan must be 
prepared accordingly and progress of Micro Irrigation activity to be reported under the 
PDMC scheme. 
xx. 
States may encourage Automation in the Micro Irrigation Systems for ease of operation 
with minimal or no manual intervention thereby achieving greater efficient use of Micro 
Irrigation Systems by the beneficiaries. The Automation unit may be linked with solar 
energy wherever possible at the farm. It is desirable that States should target5% of 
Micro Irrigation coverage under the scheme with Automation. The cost of automation 
may vary with the type of Automation adopted by the beneficiary. For adoption of 
Automation in the Micro Irrigation system under the scheme, the financial assistance 
to the beneficiary will be restricted on the existing rate of subsidy to the indicative cost 
of Rs. 40000/ha. 
xxi. 
Preference for installation of micro irrigation will be given to farmers adopting crop 
diversification to enhance the production and their income substantially. 

30 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
xxii. 
The Guidelines for implementation of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha  evem 
Utthan Mahabhiyan (PM KUSUM) Scheme, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
gives preference to farmers using Micro irrigation systems. Accordingly, PDMC should 
be converged with PM-KUSUM for promoting use of solar energy with MI systems. 
States/UTs to ensure that all solar pump beneficiaries under PM-KUSUM adopt micro 
irrigation system. 
xxiii. 
The Atal Bhujal Yojana (ABY) focuses on sustainable management of ground water 
through participatory approach. The PDMC Scheme may be converged with ABY to 
achieve the objectives of the schemes. 
xxiv. 
The Guidelines for New Generation Watershed Development Projects (WDC-PMKSY 
2.0) envisage convergence of watershed projects with PDMC. Accordingly, priority 
may be given to areas under WDC-PMKSY 2.0 to integrate activities, particularly, 
creation of water sources with that of micro irrigation. Similarly, water sources created 
under MGNREGS may be integrated with micro irrigation for their potential use. 
xxv. 
Department of Water Resources, River Development & GR is implementing Command 
Area Development & Water Management (CADWM) program. CADWM envisages 
the modernization of Irrigation Command Area i.e. providing Pressurized Piped 
Irrigation Command (PPIC) for use of Surface Water combined with other sources of 
water which provides network of established water source to farm gate for farmer to 
adopt micro irrigation in the farm to improve the Water use Efficiency at farm level. 
The States/UTs must ensure that the source/infrastructure created under the scheme 
shall be utilized for Micro Irrigation in coordination with WRD/CAD agencies. 
CADWM program shall be dovetailed with PDMC and it shall be ensured that Water 
user Societies covered under modernized CADWM program should be necessarily part 
of PDMC for adoption of MI systems. Such convergence shall make it possible to 
aggregate large areas under micro irrigation which enable better implementation, cost 
effective, maintenance & services and better market linkage of produce. 
xxvi. 
States/UTs should facilitate the beneficiary of PDMC scheme to avail Soil Health Card 
and Kisan Credit Card under the respective programs. 
B.1.4 Cluster Approach: 
i. 
States/UTs should prioritize implementation of MI through Cluster approach to have 
effective integration of sources, connectivity, distribution and application. The size of 
cluster may be 50 ha. & above in mainland states and 20 ha. in NE & hilly states. Water 

31 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
User Associations/Groups, Farmer Producer Organizations, Cooperative societies, 
Self-Help Groups, Growers’ Associations etc. shall be encouraged to adopt Micro 
Irrigation in a cluster. In such cases the beneficiary will be entitled to avail financial 
assistance through their respective organizations / bodies. The total financial assistance 
available to the individual beneficiary in the group would be 55% under the scheme. 
The land holding of the beneficiary should be located in one contiguous area. Such 
farmers groups/organizations may be allowed to avail an administrative/institutional 
charges @ 3% of the cost of the Cluster. 
ii. 
The States/UTs may encourage FPOs to take up micro irrigation at community level. 
States/UTs may ensure at least 5% micro irrigation target is implemented through 
FPOs. 
iii. 
States/UTs 
may 
enable 
such 
farmers’ 
groups 
to 
access 
capital 
from 
NBFC/Bank/NABARD so that such cluster implementation could be taken up through 
banks with Joint Liability Group (JLG). 
 
B.1.5 Public Private Partnership (PPP-MI) approach: 
States/UTs may take up projects with PPP mode of implementation. Public Private Partnership 
(PPP) approach in Project mode may be an important step for increasing MI coverage for the 
benefit of farming community. State Governments/UTs may take up projects in PPP approach 
involving farmer groups, private partners and concerned Departments in the State. Such 
projects should focus on improving water use efficiency, productivity, income of farmers, 
access to market and positive environment outcomes. 
Rationale: 
Judicious use of water is important to expand the agricultural area under irrigation. Micro 
irrigation promotes adopting optimum cropping pattern and efficient water application, that 
utilizes available water resources in an efficient manner. Saving of water will not only help in 
extending irrigation coverage but also in enhancing productivity and improving farmland 
ecosystem. The water use efficiency in irrigated areas as well as non-irrigated areas is presently 
at low level. In future there could be huge stress on water availability for agriculture as a result 
of negative impact of climate change. Very few farmers in irrigated commands are adopting 
micro irrigation system. Micro-irrigation system is cost intensive and technical with 
maintenance requirements. Capital investment in agriculture is still largely in sufficient. Micro 

32 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
irrigation penetration to small and marginal farmers especially in most rural areas is still 
lagging. There is also a need to ensure equitable access of water availability to tail end farmers. 
Better market linkage opportunities of farm produce would help in enhancing farmers income. 
In this regard, collaborative efforts between the Government and Private partners in promotion 
of micro irrigation shall open new opportunities for the benefit of the farming community. 
Strategy of PPP- Micro Irrigation: 
i. 
Public Private Partnership for integrated Project on Micro Irrigation can be executed 
through an agreement between State Government and private partners. The arrangement 
would involve a whole-lifecycle with a predetermined period where the private partners 
can extend support for both implementation (installation, construction etc.) and operation 
of the MI systems. 
ii. 
State /UT Governments may prepare projects involving Corporate/Private Partners/Other 
Entities, farmers groups and concerned Institutions/ Departments in the State. Under the 
project, allowed activities of PDMC scheme may be taken up through the scheme 
following the operational Guidelines. The other activities of the project would be 
converged from other schemes/investments from entities of the project. The proposals 
shall clearly indicate the interventions being made by the entities, the scale of the project, 
approx. number of farmers involved and the expected outcomes in terms of farmers 
benefits. 
iii. 
Various Agri retail business companies may be involved for facilitating market linkages 
of farm produce in the project area. 
iv. 
The aim is to set up PPP based projects wherein entities (eg. FPO/ Farmers Groups, 
Private Companies, Concerned Departments of the State etc.) may invest in creation of 
Common Infrastructure i.e. Water sources, pressurized pipe networks till farm end gate 
from canal /reservoir along with sumps/storages, lifting/pumping facility and the on-farm 
Micro irrigation system. Convergence with various related Government schemes may be 
made for effective utilization of available resources in the project area. 
Corporate/Industries shall be encouraged to participate in the project through their 
Corporate Social Responsibilities (CSR) outreached. 
v. 
The PDMC scheme would be dovetailed with such PPP projects. 
vi. 
Project document will have clearly marked out convergence of other Centrally Sponsored 

33 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Schemes of Ministries as well as State Schemes. 
vii. 
Transparency of complementary investments of non-Government entities and visibility 
of public-domain infrastructure created shall be ensured. 
viii. 
IT based solutions, use of advanced technologies of Micro Irrigation such as solar energy, 
Automation, use of AI, IoT etc. should be given priority for effective implementation & 
monitoring. Technologies that are complimentary to micro irrigation in reducing water 
losses or evaporation, improve soil water holding capacity etc. should be promoted along 
with MI. 
ix. 
PPP projects should explore carbon market potential which will deliver additional income 
to farmers. 
Procedure for Implementation: 
i. 
The project on PPP should include information on geography & climate, potential of 
agriculture development, available irrigation infrastructure, potential for micro irrigation, 
strategy for development and plan of action proposed to be taken. The document should 
focus on adoption of aggregation/cluster approach for coverage of micro irrigation and 
linking with available infrastructure, or to be created. Willingness of the farmers to be a 
part of the proposed project should also be included. 
ii. 
The project should reflect the whole-lifecycle with a predetermined period. The project 
shall clearly indicate the interventions/responsibilities/role of the entities, the scale of the 
project, approx. number of farmers involved and the expected outcomes in terms of 
farmers benefits and the way forward. 
iii. 
Growers/farmers/farmers group under the project would be entitled for assistance under 
other schemes of DA&FW/other Departments. The project implementing agency or the 
private partner should collect the data and required documentations of all farmers in the 
project and facilitate to access the assistance available under the PDMC scheme. 
iv. 
The State Nodal Department/Agency of PDMC of the State may call for proposals from 
entities interested in carrying out the project and short list them based on applicant’s 
experience. State can set up a committee to select and finalize the projects. 
v. 
Proposals shall be submitted to State Governments. The State Government will examine 
the project proposal from the viewpoint of suitability to need of the area. If found suitable, 
the proposal should be included in the Annual Action Plan of the State to be submit by 

34 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
the SLSC to DA&FW for approval. 
Operational Aspects: 
i. 
The Implementing Agency need to widely publicize the importance of the scheme at 
block and village levels through its existing networks to create awareness among the 
farmers. 
Organize 
District 
Level 
Seminars/Workshops 
involving 
MI 
Manufactures/Companies. Further, the State Agriculture Extension Units should organize 
camps and Trainings in collaboration with MI Manufactures/Companies to explain 
system components and their functions, type of micro irrigation for crop, post installation 
services and frequency of maintenance etc. Trainings/camps to target the family, not 
individual beneficiary. The MI manufacturer / company may provide irrigation schedule 
to farmers, make efforts for linkage to agronomic practices. 
ii. 
Dedicated Implementing Agency/Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV): States/UTs with good 
micro irrigation coverage have shown that dedicated Implementing Agency/Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) can accelerate the scheme success with overall efficiency. 
Therefore, States/UTs should setup a dedicated Implementing Agency/Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPV) at the state level with dedicated manpower to ensure that the needed 
attention is given in the implementation of the scheme. 
iii. 
Dedicated portal for implementation: States having dedicated portal for implementation 
have performed better with high level of transparency. Hence, all States/UTs should 
develop their own portal dedicated for the implementation of the scheme. Government of 
India will also develop a reference portal for use of States. States using its own portals 
should make data available to the Government of India portal through APIs. 
iv. 
All level of implementation including receipt of applications, work order, work 
completion, verification, payment release, monitoring, feedback etc. shall be captured by 
the State portal developed for the purpose. Also, the Portal should have online workflow, 
mapping all levels of implementation to ensure effective monitoring. 
v. 
The States/UTs shall adopt bio-metric/facial authentication enabled Aadhar based 
registration of applicant developed by DA&FW. The details of the applicant, such as, 
Name, Gender, Date of Birth, Identifier Name (Father/Spouse Name), etc should be 
captured as per the Aadhare KYC. The assistance should be transferred to the Aadhar 
seeded and DBT enabled active bank account of the beneficiary through DBT. In case it 
is given in kind through Companies, the intimation should be conveyed as SMS to the 
beneficiary on his mobile phone with details of assistance. The States/UTs should ensure 

35 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
that disbursement of subsidy is made a time bound activity. 
vi. 
All land based interventions should be Geo Tagged/Geo Fenced. Krishi Mapper/Mobile 
App developed by DA&FW shall be used for Geo Tagging/Geo Fencing of farmers’ field. 
The data captured by the App will automatically link with the State MIS portal through 
API. 
vii. 
The State Implementing Agency will engage Third Party Inspection Agencies (TPIAs) 
for conducting inspection/physical verification of the installed Micro Irrigation Systems 
at every farmer field. The installed site will be verified by these agencies for material 
supplied and also conduct Trial Run at the site. TPIAs should capture and upload 
photographs/videos/report of the MI installation at site which should be made available 
in the State portal. States/UTs should ensure timely installation and third party 
verification of MI installation. The Implementing Agencies must complete the timely 
inspection/physical inspection of the MI systems to avoid delay. Ideally, the physical 
inspection should be completed within 60 days of installation. Due penalty should be 
imposed on supplier if any delay in installation is observed. States/UTs must also ensure 
timely release of subsidy/top-up to the beneficiaries. 
viii. 
All scheme related information including progress and achievements should be captured 
by State portal which may be integrated with the National portal through API to ensure 
seamless flow of information. 
ix. 
The beneficiary shall be free to choose MI equipment from any MI manufacturer out of 
the approved list of registered manufacturers and also to choose the type of MI system to 
be installed as per the system design compatible with his/her cropping pattern. 
x. 
The State Implementing Agency/ SPV should conduct inspections at the factory site of 
the Supplier(s) through Third Party technical agencies such as Central Institute of Plastics 
Engineering and Technology (CIPET), ICAR Institutes, State Agriculture Universities 
etc. However, if any State/UT has already conducted such inspection of a supplier, the 
inspection report (of the supplier) may be considered by other States/UTs also. 
xi. 
All the Micro Irrigation Systems will be QR Coded. The QR code of the system will be 
linked to Unique application no./Sanction ID of the farmer on installation of the system. 
xii. 
The MI manufacturer/supplier should necessarily generate e-invoice for micro irrigation 
system supplied with details of all its components and the e-invoice shall be captured by 
the State Portal. 
xiii. 
A module/hand book may be devised by the Implementing Agency/SPV for the benefit 
of the farmers with basket of services which includes Farmer Education & Training 

36 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
(Agronomy services), maintenance & operating Micro Irrigation Systems etc. 
xiv. 
The MI supplier Agency should provide necessary services to farmers after installation 
trail run of the system for at least three years free of cost. The List of service 
centers/offices/offices of authorized distributors with full address/telephone numbers/e-
mail should be widely published (Inspection/repair/replacement). 
xv. 
A toll free customer care number will be provided by the State implementing agency for 
providing information related to Micro Irrigation Systems. Also grievance redressal and 
feedback system of the beneficiaries should be provided. 
xvi. 
To ensure strict adherence to quality standards in the use of MIS Components, the 
Implementing Agency of the State will ensure the BIS standards of supplied equipment. 
xvii. 
States to develop modules on several aspects; fertigation schedule, acid treatment, issue 
of salts/salinity in water, linkage to agronomic practices, selection of the right system etc. 
Further, States to conduct trainings and best practices demonstrations for the beneficiaries 
as well as officials/staff for better learning. 
 
B.1.6 Drip Irrigation System for states where it has been well accepted by farmers and 
good infrastructure is available 
i. 
The scheme is well accepted by the farmers and substantial coverage has been made under 
micro irrigation system compared to other parts of the country with required 
infrastructure and service facilities in the States namely Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and 
Telangana. These states are considered to be category “A” States with comparatively 
better penetration of micro irrigation technologies. 
ii. 
Drip Irrigation technology involves irrigating root zone through emitters fitted on a lateral 
tube as well as inserted within the tubing as emitting pipe. The use of different emitters 
will depend upon specific requirements, which may vary from crop to crop. 
iii. 
Fertigation is important for getting maximum benefits out of the micro irrigation 
technology. Therefore, it is mandatory to use a fertigation device by the farmers such as 
venturi injector or fertilizer tank on which the subsidy is available. 
iv. 
Water requirement, age of plant, plant to plant spacing, soil type, water quality and 
availability etc are some of the factors which decide the choice of emitting system. The 
indicative cost of drip irrigation systems (assuming peak water requirement with source 
of water at the corner of plot), for different lateral spacing and plot sizes has been 

37 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
provided in the guidelines. An indicative list of system components required for installing 
a drip irrigation system in the areas ranging from 0.2 ha to 5 ha is at Annexure-XIII(a 
to g), on the basis of which subsidy will be calculated as per Table 1: 
 
Table 1: Indicative cost of Drip Irrigation System for calculation of subsidy 
(Cost in Rs.) 
Spacing 
(mxm) 
0.2 
ha 
0.4 ha 
1 ha 
2 ha 
3 ha 
4 ha 
5 ha 
12x12 
10526 
18009 
24586 
39098 
60704 
75521 
96166 
10x10 
10854 
18652 
26181 
42226 
65487 
82025 
104292 
9x9 
11091 
19114 
27304 
44469 
68853 
86606 
110024 
8x8 
11330 
19711 
28777 
47314 
73272 
92615 
117529 
6x6 
12400 
21693 
34687 
57987 
93688 
113618 
142566 
5x5 
13144 
23486 
39378 
67199 
97110 
123409 
165815 
4x4 
14602 
24326 
41534 
72799 
113560 
148684 
176964 
3x3 
15792 
26190 
47751 
82654 
127306 
160103 
200455 
2.5x2.5 
19516 
35393 
68234 
124216 
189724 
266274 
325233 
2x2 
23932 
41303 
83085 
161263 
234280 
325469 
399494 
1.5x1.5 
28106 
46995 
97245 
185324 
276767 
382246 
470306 
2.5x0.6 
20201 
35000 
71733 
131824 
201464 
279770 
343433 
1.8x0.6 
24569 
42992 
91560 
173298 
260868 
355323 
442484 
1.5x0.6 
28003 
50116 
109531 
207860 
313909 
425189 
530905 
1.2x0.6 (or 
lower spacing) 
31436 
57241 
127501 
242422 
366950 
495055 
619326 
v. 
In case of crops with plant spacing other than those mentioned in above table, the amount 
of assistance could be calculated on pro rata/average basis of the nearest plant area (Row 
to row x plant to plant spacing in metre). The example is given below. 
a. If a subsidy has to be calculated for 1.5 x 1.5mspacing i.e. between 1.0 ha (₹97245) 
and 2.0 ha (₹185324), the cost would be: ₹97245 + [(₹185324-₹97245) /(2.0 ha–
1.0ha) x (1.5ha–1.0ha)]. 
b. If a subsidy has to be calculated for 1.0 ha and 3.5 x 3.5m spacing i.e. between 
4.0x4.0m (₹41534) and 3.0x3.0m (₹47751) the cost would be:₹41534+[(₹47751-
₹41534)/(4.0x4.0–3.0x3.0)X(4.0x4.0–3.5x3.5)]. 
vi. 
The unit cost of Drip Irrigation system varies with respect to plant spacing and location 
of the water source. The farmer can avail other interventions as per Annexure XIII (a-
n) as per specific requirement of the field in which micro- irrigation system is to be 

38 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
installed. 
vii. 
Assistance under the scheme is available for all types of drip irrigation systems such as 
on-line & in-line drip irrigation systems. 
viii. 
As small farm holdings may not have individual source of water, it would be preferable 
to encourage a group of farmers to avail the benefits of drip irrigation through a common 
water source. 
ix. 
A beneficiary having farms located at different places and having different water source 
may avail the subsidy as per the guidelines. However, a beneficiary cannot split area at 
one location into small pockets of the same crop for claiming assistance under the 
scheme. If a beneficiary has more than one crop with different crop spacing being grown 
separately in his/her land holding, assistance will be available for installing the drip 
irrigation system as per the individual crop spacing, the combined area of which will not 
exceed 5 ha per beneficiary. 
x. 
In case of inter-cropping, assistance will be available for the prescribed plant spacing/ 
area, subject to the condition that the assistance will be provided only for one crop as per 
the farmers’ choice. 
 
B.1.7 Drip Irrigation System in states with low penetration 
Based on the prevailing coverage and acceptance by farmers, states namely Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Goa, Punjab and Union 
Territories have been identified as states with low penetration of micro irrigation technology. 
These states are considered as category “B” in terms of implementation of micro irrigation. 
The cost of drip system is likely to be higher in these states due to various factors such as lesser 
presence of manufacturing companies in these states leading to higher cost of transportation, 
the companies will have to make considerable efforts in making the farmers ready for adoption 
of technology, and higher cost involved in providing after sales service in these states etc. Thus, 
15% higher cost has been taken in consideration while working out the unit cost of drip system 
in the table below for these states for the purpose of subsidy calculation as per indicative list 
of system components given at Annexure XIII(a - n) 
 
Table 2: Indicative cost of Drip Irrigation System for calculation of subsidy in the states 
where penetration level is low (Cost in Rs.) 

39 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Spacing 
(mxm) 
0.2 
ha 
0.4 ha 
1 ha 
2 ha 
3 ha 
4 ha 
5 ha 
12x12 
12105 
20710 
28274 
44962 
69810 
86849 
110591 
10x10 
12482 
21450 
30109 
48560 
75310 
94329 
119935 
9x9 
12755 
21981 
31399 
51139 
79181 
99597 
126527 
8x8 
13030 
22667 
33094 
54412 
84263 
106507 
135159 
6x6 
14260 
24947 
39890 
66685 
107741 
130661 
163951 
5x5 
15115 
27009 
45285 
77279 
111676 
141921 
190687 
4x4 
16792 
27975 
47765 
83719 
130594 
170987 
203508 
3x3 
18161 
30119 
54913 
95052 
146402 
184119 
230523 
2.5x2.5 
22444 
40702 
78469 
142848 
218183 
306215 
374018 
2x2 
27522 
47498 
95547 
185453 
269421 
374289 
459418 
1.5x1.5 
32322 
54044 
111832 
213122 
318282 
439583 
540852 
2.5x0.6 
23231 
40250 
82493 
151597 
231684 
321735 
394948 
1.8x0.6 
28255 
49441 
105295 
199293 
299998 
408621 
508857 
1.5x0.6 
32203 
57634 
125960 
239039 
360995 
488967 
610541 
1.2x0.6 (or 
lower spacing) 
36151 
65827 
146626 
278786 
421992 
569313 
712224 
i. 
In case of crops with plant spacing other than those mentioned in above table, the 
amount of assistance could be calculated on pro rata/average basis of the nearest plant 
area (Row to row x plant to plant spacing in metres) similar to example given in 9.5. 
ii. 
The assistance will be available for all types of drip irrigation systems; on- line and in-
line drip irrigation systems. 
iii. 
In case of inter-cropping, assistance will be available for the prescribed plant 
spacing/area, subject to the condition that the assistance will be provided only for one 
crop as per the farmers’ choice. 
B.1.8 Drip Irrigation System for North Eastern and Himalayan States 
The coverage of MI system in North Eastern and hilly region is much low due to poor 
infrastructure and difficult terrain. The states namely Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand are considered under category “C”. In the Hilly states, following points need to 
be kept in mind while designing a drip irrigation system keeping in view the sloppy and 
terraced land: 
i 
It is difficult to lay PVC main and sub-main lines below the ground surface and therefore 
HDPE pipes are required in place of PVC. 

40 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
ii The undulating and vertical slopes would lead to comparatively larger length of pipes. 
iii To maintain uniform pressure and to irrigate upper most terrace of land, control valve 
should be provided at sub-main/main lines at 4m vertical drop. Accordingly, the number 
of flush valves will also increase. 
The cost of drip system is likely to be higher in North Eastern & Himalayan states because of 
the terrain, higher transport cost, lesser presence of manufacturing companies etc. Therefore, 
unit cost of micro irrigation systems is taken 25% higher in these states for the purpose of 
subsidy calculations and is given in table below (including 25%) for the indicative list of system 
components is at Annexure XIII (a - n)  
Table 3: Unit cost for NE&H states 
(Cost in Rs.) 
Spacing 
(mxm) 
0.2 
ha 
0.4 ha 
1 ha 
2 ha 
3 ha 
4 ha 
5 ha 
12x12 
13157 
22511 
30733 
48872 
75881 
94402 
120207 
10x10 
13567 
23315 
32727 
52783 
81859 
102531 
130365 
9x9 
13864 
23893 
34130 
55586 
86066 
108258 
137530 
8x8 
14163 
24638 
35971 
59143 
91590 
115768 
146912 
6x6 
15500 
27116 
43358 
72484 
117110 
142023 
178207 
5x5 
16430 
29357 
49223 
83999 
121387 
154262 
207269 
4x4 
18252 
30408 
51918 
90999 
141950 
185855 
221205 
3x3 
19740 
32738 
59688 
103318 
159132 
200129 
250569 
2.5x2.5 
24395 
44242 
85292 
155270 
237156 
332842 
406542 
2x2 
29915 
51628 
103856 
201579 
292849 
406836 
499367 
1.5x1.5 
35132 
58744 
121556 
231655 
345959 
477807 
587883 
2.5x0.6 
25251 
43750 
89666 
164780 
251830 
349712 
429292 
1.8x0.6 
30712 
53740 
114451 
216622 
326085 
444153 
553106 
1.5x0.6 
35003 
62645 
136914 
259825 
392386 
531486 
663631 
1.2x0.6 (or 
lower spacing) 
39295 
71551 
159377 
303028 
458687 
618819 
774157 
In case of crops with plant spacing other than those mentioned in above table, the amount of 
assistance could be calculated on pro rata/average basis of the nearest plant area (Row to row 
x plant to plant spacing in metres) similar to example given in 9.5. 
B.1.9 Sprinkler Irrigation 
i. 
In sprinkler irrigation, water is discharged under pressure in the air through a set of 
nozzles attached to a network of High Density Poly Ethylene (HDPE) pipes, 

41 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
simulating the rainfall. Sprinkler irrigation systems are suitable for irrigating crops 
where the plant density is very high. It is widely used for cereals; pulses; seeds; spices; 
and field crops. 
ii. 
Financial assistance would be restricted as per the cost of High Density Poly Ethylene 
(HDPE) pipes used in sprinkler irrigation systems, even though, the beneficiaries may 
use aluminum pipes as well. The sprinkler irrigation systems may be portable, mini 
sprinklers, micro sprinklers, semi-permanent sprinklers and large volume sprinkler 
systems (Rain-guns). Additional 25% and 15% on the indicated unit cost may be 
considered for calculation of subsidy for Hilly states including NE region and low 
penetrating State respectively. 
B.1.10 Portable Sprinkler Irrigation System 
i. 
In portable sprinkler irrigation systems the HDPE pipes are used for mains and sub-
mains which can be shifted from one place to another as per the irrigation schedule 
with respect to design layout. These can be used in both, plains as well as in 
undulating terrains. 
ii. 
The indicative number of components required for various area range of sprinkler 
irrigation system is annexed. Financial assistance will be provided based on the 
number of pipes procured by the beneficiary for the area under reference. An 
indicative list of system components required for installing portable sprinkler 
irrigation system is at Annexure-XIV on the basis of which subsidy will be 
calculated. The indicative cost for various area ranges and pipe sizes is given below 
in Table 4below: 
Table 4: Indicative Cost of Portable Sprinkler Irrigation System 
(Cost in Rs.) 
Area 
Pipe Dia.(mm) 
63 
75 
90 
Upto0.4ha 
13211 
NA 
NA 
1ha 
21588 
24194 
0 
2ha 
31167 
34657 
0 
3ha 
NA 
NA 
46779 
4ha 
NA 
NA 
58995 
5ha 
NA 
NA 
66789 
Note: i) In case of area other than those mentioned in above table, the amount of assistance could be calculated 
on pro rata/average basis of the nearest area. 

42 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
ii) In case of low penetrating states and hilly states including NE region, 15% and 25% higher indicative 
cost respectively may be taken for calculation of subsidy. 
B.1.11 Micro Sprinklers 
i. 
Micro Sprinklers are mostly used for irrigating leafy vegetables, nurseries, hardening 
of seedlings and a few vegetables. Apart from providing irrigation, the micro 
sprinkler also helps in changing the micro climatic conditions near the plant. Micro 
sprinklers are low radius sprinklers. The selection of micro sprinklers depends on the 
type of crop, soil, types etc. 
ii. 
An indicative list of system components required for installing a micro sprinkler 
system is at Annexure-XV. The indicative cost of Micro Sprinkler irrigation system 
at different lateral spacing & area is given in Table5: 
Table 5: Indicative Cost of Micro Sprinkler Irrigation System 
(Cost in Rs.) 
 
Area(ha) 
Spacing(mxm) 
5x5 
3x3 
0.4 
32713 
38263 
1 
65102 
74259 
2 
114426 
133821 
3 
164937 
191078 
4 
222721 
263852 
5 
281557 
321462 
Note: i) In case of area other than those mentioned in above table, the amount of assistance could be calculated 
on pro rata/average basis of the nearest area. 
ii) In case of low penetrating states and hilly states including NE region, 15% and 25% higher indicative 
cost respectively may be taken for calculation of subsidy. 
 
B.1.12 Mini Sprinklers 
They are commonly used for close growing crops like groundnut, potato, onion, ginger, short 
statured fodder crops, etc. Mini sprinklers are also suitable for frost protection. An indicative 
list of system components required for installing a mini sprinkler irrigation system is enclosed 
at Annexure XVI. The indicative cost of Mini Sprinkler irrigation system at different lateral 
spacing and area is given below in Table 6 below: 
 
 

43 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Table 6: Indicative Cost of Mini Sprinkler Irrigation System 
(Cost in Rs.) 
Area(ha) 
Spacing (mxm) 
5x5 
3x3 
0.4 
45694 
47528 
1 
94134 
103873 
2 
176766 
187929 
3 
268422 
290935 
4 
345497 
380031 
5 
423236 
469890 
Note: i) In case of area other than those mentioned in above table, the amount of assistance could be calculated 
on pro rata/average basis of the nearest area. 
 
ii) In case of low penetrating states and hilly states including NE region, 15% and 25% higher indicative 
cost respectively may be taken for calculation of subsidy. 
B.1.13 Semi-Permanent Sprinkler Irrigation System 
a) In Semi-Permanent Sprinkler System, the piping network for main line and lateral lines 
are permanently buried with risers fitted on the lateral lines. The sprinkler nozzles are 
fitted on each riser pipe and can be easily shifted from one place to another to irrigate 
the required area in shifts as per the irrigation schedule or the crop water requirement. 
b) The indicative number of components required for various area ranges of semi-
permanent sprinkler irrigation systems is enclosed at Annexure XVII 
c) The estimated unit cost for various area ranges is given below in Table 7 below: 
 
Table 7: Indicative Cost of Semi-Permanent Sprinkler System 
Area(Ha) 
Cost(in Rs) 
0.4 
24919 
1 
40440 
2 
77113 
3 
104083 
4 
132997 
5 
161345 
Note: i) In case of area other than those mentioned in above table, the amount of assistance could be calculated 
on pro rata/average basis of the nearest area. 
ii) In case of low penetrating states and hilly states including NE region, 15% and 25% higher indicative 
cost respectively may be taken for calculation of subsidy. 
 

44 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
B.1.14 Large Volume Sprinkler Irrigation System (Raingun) 
1) Large volume sprinkler irrigation systems (Rain guns) are used where larger areas are 
to be covered with one or two sprinklers. These sprinklers have a discharge ranging 
from 10,000 lph to 32,000 lph and radius of throw from24 m to 36 m. These systems 
require high pressure and high discharge pipes & pumps to operate them. These are 
preferred for irrigating crops spread over large areas in short time. The indicative list 
of components is enclosed at Annexure XVIII. 
2) Pivot Irrigation system is used for a much larger area & are not suitable for the 
beneficiaries targeted under PDMC. However, if some beneficiary is interested, may 
avail financial assistance as per unit cost norms of rain-gun system. The estimated unit 
cost for various area is given in Table 9: 
Table 9: Indicative Cost of Large Volume Sprinkler (Rain-gun) 
(Cost in Rs.) 
Area (Ha) 
Pipe Dia.(mm) 
63 
75 
90 
1 
31684 
38127 
NA 
2 
NA 
48370 
NA 
3 
NA 
NA 
62767 
4 
NA 
NA 
72751 
5 
NA 
NA 
79894 
Note: 
i) In case of area other than those mentioned in above table, the amount of assistance could be calculated 
on pro rata/average basis of the nearest area. 
ii) In case of low penetrating states and hilly states including NE region, 15% and 25% higher indicative 
cost respectively may be taken for calculation of subsidy. 
 
B.1.15 Optional Components 
1) The use of optional components depends upon the agro climatic conditions of the place & 
requirement of the beneficiary. The provision is kept to provide the said component on the 
then existing rate of subsidy to the beneficiary; if required & provided. These components 
are: 
i. 
Fertilizer tank - to increase fertilizer use efficiency, fertilizer tanks have been 
included in the list of equipment eligible for financial assistance. The beneficiary 
can opt for either fertilizer tank or venturi system or automated dosing system 
equipment and financial assistance will be provided for either of those components. 

45 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
ii. 
Sand filters/media filters- to remove organic matter and inorganic contaminants 
from water sources like rivers, tanks and open wells. Sand/media filters have been 
included the financial assistance. 
iii. 
Hydro Cyclone Filters/Sand Separators - to remove particles of the size of 75 
microns (200 mesh) which have a higher density than water, hydro cyclone 
filters/sand separators have been introduced as an optional item for which financial 
assistance will be provided. These equipments require minimum maintenance and 
are useful for cleaning river water, canal water and tube well water which may 
contain sand. 
iv. 
Drip Line Winder- for wrapping the drip laterals has been included for financial 
assistance. 
2) The detailed guideline for water quality & filters selection is provided at Annexure XX 
respectively. The indicative cost of optional components such as sand filters, hydro cyclone 
filters and fertilizer tanks is annexed at Annexure XXI 
3) States may take up sources creation -Other Interventions (OI) activities under the scheme 
and must be linked with Micro Irrigation to make potential use of the available funds for 
higher water use efficiency. These activities should be based on actual requirement and as 
per the needs of the farmer who adopts the Micro irrigation system. The details of eligible 
OI activities for financial assistance and cost Norms is provided at Annexure XXII 
4) Optional items if any other than above may be allowed. However, cost of these items will 
be borne by the beneficiary. 
B.1.16 Key Administrative requirements 
(i) The unit cost norms indicated in the guidelines for various technologies/ specifications 
are for the purpose of calculating subsidy ceiling amount only i.e. it can be less but not 
more than the indicated amount if the cost is more. The actual cost of the system, 
however, would vary as per design of the field and other agro climatic conditions. It is 
to be ensured that all compulsory system components are provided to the farmer. The 
BOQ given in the table is indicative & may vary case to case. 
(ii) An individual eligible to receive the benefits under the scheme is required to furnish 
proof of possession of Aadhaar Number or undergo Aadhaar registration. If one 
individual is eligible but do not possess the Aadhaar number she/he can get enrolled 

46 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
visiting the Aadhaar enrolment centre. State Government/Union Territories 
Administration is required to offer Aadhaar registration facilities to the beneficiaries 
who are not enrolled and in case no Aadhaar enrolment centre is available in certain 
blocks/ taluka/ tehshil, the nodal department through its implementing agency is 
required to provide enrolment facilities at convenient locations in coordination with the 
Registrars of UIDAI. Till the time Aadhaar is assigned to individual, she/he can avail 
the benefit of the scheme on production of the following documents Aadhaar enrolment 
ID slip/ Copy of request for Aadhaar enrolment and Voter Identity Card/ PAN/ 
Passport/ Ration Card /Employee Govt. ID/Passbook of bank or post 
office/MGNREGS card/ Kissan photo passbook/ Driving License/ any other document 
as specified by State/UT. 
(iii) Aadhaar details need to be linked through a web based registration process. The 
assistance if given in cash, need to be transferred to the bank account of the beneficiary 
and in case it is given in terms of kind through Companies, the intimation be conveyed 
as SMS to the beneficiary mobile phone with details of assistance. It should be ensured 
that no eligible beneficiary suffers for want of Aadhaar and it would be the 
responsibility of implementing agency to ensure that Aadhaar enrolment of such 
beneficiaries is carried out on priority. The notification issued in this respect is given at 
Annexure-XXIII 
(iv) It must be ensured that at least 50% of the allocation is utilised for small, marginal 
farmers of which, at-least 30% should be women beneficiaries/farmers. Further, 16.5% 
and 8.5% of the total allocation or in proportion of SC/ST population in the district 
should be utilised for Special Component Plan (SCP) & Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) 
respectively. 
(v) Transparency in beneficiary selection – It should be ensured that the Implementing 
Agency follows uniform procedures and full transparency in selection of beneficiaries 
and release of assistance to the beneficiaries in an efficient manner. Enlisting of the 
beneficiaries should be open round the year facilitating submission of applications by 
beneficiaries any time for availing the benefit of financial assistance under the scheme. 
The state implementing agency need to adopt a web based IT model for implementation 
of the scheme. Implementing Agency should ensure that selection of beneficiaries is 
done as per details included in the Annual Action Plan for the component for the year 
which has been derived from the DIP. 

47 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
(vi) All level of implementation shall be in the State portal platform developed for the 
purpose. The Portal should have online workflow, mapping all levels of implementation 
to ensure effective monitoring. 
a) Pre-installation activities 
 The Implementing Agency need to widely publicize the scheme at the block and 
village levels through its existing networks. 
 Appoint a nodal officer who is responsible for coordination of the scheme 
implementation with the Districts. 
 Disseminate the list of suppliers and rate list approved by SLSC to the farmers. 
 Organize at least one District Level Seminar/Workshop with the participation 
of Industry. 
 Compile the application submitted by the farmers and scrutinize, codify and 
forward the same to the company’s/Manufacturer’s local office indicated by the 
farmer. 
 The beneficiary share may be deposited with manufacturer/their representative 
or the state nodal agency as per the practices to be adopted by the state with the 
approval of SLSC. 
 The beneficiary shall be free to purchase MI equipment from any MI 
manufacture out of the approved list of registered manufacturers. 
b) The manufacturer/company will do/provide the following: 
 Assess the crop water requirement as per the crop for which the system is to be 
provided. 
 Design the system as per the crop water requirement. 
 Prepare an estimate of cost and submit it to Implementing agency duly 
indicating the time frame in which the system will be installed in the farmer’s 
field once work order is issued. 
 The Implementing agency will approve the estimate, issue work order and 
ensure installation. 
 Efforts will be made by the MIS Supplier to ensure coverage of MI in the water 

48 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
scarce, stressed area, critical ground water districts/blocks and in potential & 
untapped area of the State. 
c) The Company will install the system and commission it to the satisfaction of the 
beneficiary duly ensuring that: 
 Quality components having BIS marking are installed in the farmer’s field, and 
while making payment the implementing agency will ensure the BIS standard 
of supplied equipment, whichever the BIS standard exists. 
 The date of manufacturing should be printed on the components as per 
prevailing statutory norms. 
 Implementing agency will ensure that MI system installed in each field bears 
separate QR code. 
 The installed system should match the water requirement of the crop. 
 Necessary orientation and training is given to the beneficiary on the system 
maintenance & irrigating the crop with drip/sprinkler irrigation. 
 Proper warranty and a user’s manual for running & maintenance of the system 
- whether drip or sprinkler or both- as the case may be is provided to the 
beneficiary. 
 A certificate towards successful installation/commissioning of the system is 
obtained from the beneficiary. 
d) Disbursement of assistance post installation. 
 Financial assistance to the beneficiary will be limited to the prescribed subsidy 
as per unit cost as prescribed under the guidelines or the actual Bill of 
Quantities (BoQ) whichever is less. On physical verification of satisfactory 
installation of the system & a certificate to that effect from the beneficiary, 
Implementing Agency will release payment to the beneficiary electronically in 
his/ her bank account. 
 The Implementing Agency shall ensure proper invoice with statutory 
commercial details i.e. Serial number, GSTIN number etc. printed on it and 
countersigned by the authorized representative of the MI System manufacturer 
is issued to the beneficiary & subsidy released on the same. 

49 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
 The manufacturer will install the system as per the agreement with the state 
nodal agency and the procedure for payment as decided by the SLSC may be 
adopted. Electronic mode of payment is required to be followed for most of the 
transactions for implementation of the programme. In case the amount is 
placed with manufacturers/ companies/financial institutions on behalf of 
beneficiary, the consent of beneficiary is required and the transaction details 
need to be conveyed to him over SMS immediately and subsequently in writing 
too. 
Micro irrigation system may be insured for the period of its expected life and the premium may 
be borne by beneficiary/state government based on the decisions to be taken by States. 
B.1.17 Registration of manufacturing companies 
i 
Registration of micro irrigation system manufacturers shall be done with the approval 
of SLSC for a period of five years. The registration will be open round the year and a 
company can apply at any time. Only those manufacturing companies, which have all 
the facilities to ensure supply of quality product as per BIS standards and can provide 
prompt after sales services will be registered. The registration will be subject to the 
satisfactory performance of the company as assessed by the state implementing agency 
and repeated failures will lead to the de-registration by SLSC. 
ii The companies willing to participate in the scheme should be manufacturing below 
mentioned components and own BIS in their name: 
iii In the case of drip irrigation, company must manufacture at least laterals and emitting 
devices as specified conforming to BIS standards. For online drip irrigation systems the 
company should be manufacturing lateral tubing as well as drippers as per BIS and for 
inline drip irrigation systems, the company should be a manufacturer of inline emitting 
pipe. 
iv In the case of portable sprinkler irrigation system the company should manufacture 
coupled HDPE pipes or sprinklers and should possess respective BIS. 
v In the case of other sprinkler irrigation systems viz. Mini, Micro, Semi- permanent 
sprinkler irrigation systems the company should manufacture either of HDPE/PVC/PE 
pipes/nozzles and should possess respective BIS. 
vi In the case of large volume sprinkler irrigation system (rain gun sprinklers) the 

50 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
company should manufacture HDPE pipes or nozzle and should possess respective BIS. 
vii The company must provide guarantee of quality assurance of other components which 
are not manufactured by them in various technologies covered under the scheme. 
viii The company must provide free after sales service to the farmers for three years from 
the date of installation of system. Moreover, they should set up service centres for 
providing technological support at the grass root level. 
ix The registration under the scheme should be open throughout the year to enable 
maximum flexibility and open participation. 
x The company will supply only BIS marked material. The list of relevant BIS 
components is given at Annexure XXIV. 
xi In case the company intends to supply imported components, it shall be eligible for 
subsidy under the scheme subjected to indigenization of manufacturing of the 
component within a period of two years. In case of imported equipment, the techno- 
economic analysis report will be provided by NCPAH after proper examination and 
verification and submit report to DA&FW. 
xii The material should be supplied directly by the manufacturer or their authorized 
distributors/dealers. In all cases, the manufacturer should authenticate the invoices. 
Such manufacturers shall furnish a Bank Guarantee of quantum of which will be 
prescribed by SLSC valid for the period of registration. 
xiii Each company may have its own pricing system. However, the company would be 
required to submit the same to the Registering Authority/SLSC at the beginning of the 
year and as and when the prices are revised by the company. 
B.1.18 After sales services & campaigns 
i 
Operation and Maintenance of the system requires adequate training of beneficiaries 
for system operation etc. The manufacturers should have required network for 
providing training and after sales service in their areas of operation. The manufacturers 
should provide detailed operational and maintenance manual in the local vernacular 
language at the time of installation of the system. The beneficiaries should be advised 
to follow the instructions provided by the manufacturers for the operation and 
maintenance of drip/sprinkler irrigation systems. 

51 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
ii Service centres and / or offices of drip / sprinkler system manufacturers / authorised 
distributors should have facilities to provide technical guidance on system maintenance 
schedules, supply spare parts and ensure satisfactory performance of the system during 
the warranty period. The manufacturer must also operate a toll free customer care 
number where beneficiaries can register their complaints. List of service 
centres/offices/offices of authorised distributors with full address/telephone numbers/e-
mail should be widely published. 
iii After sales service should be provided by the manufacturer/authorized distributor, free 
of cost for at least a period of three years. The company shall repair or replace any 
components/instruments of the MI system free of cost within warranty period, if they 
are found to have manufacturing defects or workmanship defects. 
iv Due to normal wear and tear, if any parts/components require repairing/replacement, 
the company shall supply the same and recover the cost from the beneficiary after the 
free period is over. The company or its authorised representatives shall provide 
acid/chlorine treatment to drip system once during the first year of operation of the 
system. However, the company should provide training to the beneficiary on this aspect 
to enable him to do further treatment by himself. 
v If any system manufacturer fails to provide such service, the same should be brought 
to the notice of district level committee and SLSC. The manufacturer would be 
responsible for any dispute arising from the supply of their product/component directly 
or through their authorised distributors/dealers. The Implementing Agency/ SLSC of 
each State shall evolve a process and modus operandi to redress the disputes, if any. In 
cases where product quality related complaints from beneficiaries are received due 
sampling process mentioned in the guidelines shall be followed. 
vi The SLSC may take measures against erring companies or their authorized dealers, as 
well as their own staff after due hearing in order to safeguard the interests of 
farmers/beneficiaries and to ensure effective utilization of public funds. However, 
before initiating any action, principle of natural justice should be followed. 
vii There could be extension campaigns by the MI companies at a centralized location 
having area nodal officials, farmers & other related officials. Various aspects of system 
maintenance, acid treatment, fertigation etc. could be covered. The technical support 
group NCPAH would maintain a data appropriately to monitor these activities. 

52 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
viii The State agencies ensure the campaigns by companies should cover all beneficiaries 
under warranty period & could be as under: 
More than 5000 ha area coverage in the state 6 campaigns 1000-5000 ha area 
coverage in the state    4 campaigns Less than 1000 ha area coverage in the state 2 
campaigns 
ix The States should develop a grievance redresser system for farmers with a unique toll 
free number to assist the farmers for their queries and after sale service. If required, 
Micro Irrigation installing Company may also be asked to provide a Toll Free number. 
B.1.19 Violations & Penalties 
i 
The Central & State Governments, micro irrigation suppliers/manufacturers and other 
stake holders are putting in a lot of efforts for effective operations of micro irrigation 
systems. Any wrong operations could lead to system failure & financial loss to the 
beneficiary apart from loss of faith in the technology. It is, therefore, important to have 
well defined measures / terms for violation of norms by the stake-holders. Any violation 
to the quality, maintenance and other parameters need be viewed seriously. The list of 
violations mentioned below is not exhaustive and any other deviations, which affect the 
implementation of the scheme adversely may be considered by the DMIC/SLC as 
deemed fit for smooth functioning of the same. 
ii A due process, where show cause is issued and adequate time is allowed for response, 
shall be followed and the MI companies as well as the beneficiary shall be adequately 
heard and natural justice provided. 
iii In case of violations in respect of failure in quality control &quality assurance and to 
provide maintenance & after sales service, following penalties shall be imposed: 
a) First time in a year, a warning letter may be issued to the manufacturer instructing 
to rectify the short coming immediately. 
b) Second time in same year, a warning letter may be issued to the manufacturer 
instructing to rectify the shortcoming immediately with a penalty of 10% of 
invoice value. 
c) Third time in same year, a penalty of 25% of invoice value may be charged. 
d) Fourth time in same year, a show cause notice may be issued to the company and 
the case may be refer to SLSC for de-listing the company for a period of one year 

53 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
or more as decided by SLSC. 
iv The violations with regard to submission of bills without installation/partial installation, 
wrong invoicing, variations in component specifications, submission of wrong 
documents with reference to pump/system discharge, improper installation, quoting 
higher price than approved, deviations from prescribed material specifications etc. may 
be dealt with by the SLSC suitably apart from initiating suitable action under the 
relevant sections of Indian penal code and other relevant/ appropriate statutory 
enactments. 
v In case of sale of the MI system to other farmers before expiry of average life of the 
system, for which subsidy has been claimed by the beneficiary, legal proceedings 
against the beneficiary as per applicable law may be initiated and the beneficiary may 
be blacklisted from availing any government assistance in future. 
B.1.20 Quality Control 
i 
Crucial aspect of supply of micro irrigation systems is the quality of hardware which is 
delivered to the farmer. It needs to be ensured that quality components having BIS marking 
(wherever applicable) are installed in the beneficiary field. Poor quality has an adverse 
impact on performance of the system which may affect yield of the crop, quantity of water 
applied, quantity of fertilizer delivered to the plant etc. It may also increase energy 
consumption. In fact, sub-standard system will not only adversely impact performance, 
but could also reduce the durability and the life of the components and/or system. 
ii The SLSC shall form joint inspection teams for field inspection and frequent surveillance 
by inspection teams will be a regular feature under the Scheme. They will draw random 
samples periodically from the field, within a period of three years from the date of 
installation of the system. At the time of inspection, the system should be fully functional. 
The report should be submitted to the competent authority under SLSC for further action. 
iii While one surveillance visit per operative year shall be kept as the general norm, more or 
less inspections may be planned depending on the performance or specific guidelines 
issued by SLSC. 
iv Samples for testing should be collected jointly by the joint inspection team, state nodal 
official and the company representatives in triplicate and properly labelled, sealed and 
signed. The samples are collected for all major system components, especially pipes & 

54 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
tubing. One set of samples should be sent to CIPET/BIS or any other approved product 
testing laboratory for testing as the SLSC may deem fit, another set is to be preserved in 
the custody of nodal officer and the third one is to be with the manufacturer. After 
collection of samples at random, they should be coded as per BIS guidelines for the 
purpose of security and further reference. 
v Collection of samples with batch number is mandatory. The samples may be collected 
from the beneficiaries’ fields as well as the supply chain of the manufacturer after the 
product has been dispatched from the manufacturing unit. 
vi The quantity of material required for conducting the test is as detailed below: 
Sl. No. 
Test 
Test samples required 
Laterals as per IS : 12786 & Emitting Pipes as per IS : 13488 
1 
Identification & composition analysis 
15 meters for laterals. 50 meters
emitting pipe. 
2 
Thickness 
3 
Pressure Test 
4 
Dimensions 
HDPE Pipes IS: 17425:2020 
1 
Identification & composition analysis 
1 mts 
2 
Thickness 
3 
Pressure Test 
4 
Dimensions 
UPVC Pipes IS: 4985 
1 
Identification & composition analysis 
1 mts 
2 
Thickness 
3 
Pressure Test 
4 
Dimensions 
Emitters / drippers as per IS : 13487 
1 
Identification & composition analysis 
50 Nos 
2 
Flow Rate 
vii The expenditure towards the testing charges shall be met from the administrative charges 
under the scheme. 
viii The state nodal officer will do proper scrutiny of the test report provided by the testing 
laboratory and draw conclusion from the findings regarding conformity or otherwise of 
the samples under the test. After scrutiny, the details of test report and results of 
conformity/non-conformity shall be placed before SLSC for consideration. In case of non-
conformity, SLSC may take action against the company/its authorised dealers as per 
penalty clause mentioned in the scheme guidelines. The SLSC shall follow principle of 
natural justice and the company as well as the beneficiary shall be heard before taking a 

55 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
final action in the matter. 
B.1.21 
Human Resource Development and Media 
i 
Human resource development is an important component of the scheme. Under the 
programme training of farmers, entrepreneurs, field level workers, officers, micro 
irrigation technician and farm pond lining technician and trainers’ training may be taken 
up. 
ii The financial provisions for the same would be as under: 
a) Training of stake holders 
i) Within the State 
Rs. 1000/day per farmer including transport 
100% of the cost. 
ii)Outside the State 
Project based as per actual 
100% of the cost. 
b) Exposure visit of stake holders 
i) Outside the State 
Project based as per actual 
100% of the cost. 
ii)Outside India 
Rs. 4.00 lakh/participants 
Project Based 100% of 
air/rail travel. 
Course fee cost to be 
funded 
under 
Mission 
Management 
c) Study tour of technical staff/ field functionaries 
i) Within the State 
Rs. 300/day per participant plus TA/DA as admissible 100% of the cost. 
ii) 
Study 
tour 
to 
progressive States/units 
(group of minimum 5 
participants) 
Rs. 800/day per participant plus TA/DA as admissible
100% of the cost. 
iii)Outside India 
Rs. 4.00 lakh/participants 
100% of air/rail travel and 
course fee cost to be funded 
under Mission 
Management 
iii For organization of a workshop/conference or participation in an international event the 
financial provision is given below. However, prior approval of DA &FW will be required 
for participation in international events. 
International level event 
Rs. 7.50 lakh per event. 
100% of the cost perevent of 4 days, on 
pro rata basis. 
National level event 
Rs. 5.00 lakh per event. 
100% of the cost perevent of two days. 
State level event 
Rs. 3.00 lakh per event. 
100% of the cost perevent of two days. 
District level event 
Rs. 2.00 lakh per event. 
100% of the cost perevent of two days. 
iv Area wise/District wise Awareness/Publicity creation - awareness creation and publicity 
of the micro irrigation technology will be undertaken through print and electronic media 
and other methods. The publicity campaigns at block/ district/state level need be 
undertaken by the state nodal agencies. 
v The expenses for above Human Resource Development activities and awareness 
programmes etc. will be met from the administrative expenses earmarked under the 

56 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
scheme. 
B.1.22 Pattern of Assistance: The total financial assistance available to the beneficiary under 
the micro irrigation scheme from both Central and State Governments would be 55% for small 
& marginal farmers & 45% for other farmers. The unit cost would be limited to the Indicative 
costs mentioned in the guidelines for various technologies and areas as given at Annexure 
Nos. XIII (a - n). For the purpose of calculating subsidy the unit cost shall include the 
applicable GST. 
 
 

57 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
B.2 
SMAM 
Agricultural machines take an important role to increase productivity with timely and precise 
fieldwork. To promote the usage of farm mechanization and increase the ratio of farm power 
to cultivable unit area the scheme will be implemented with the following strategies. 
 
B.2.1 Strategy: 
 
To achieve the objectives of SMAM, the following strategies will be adopted:  
 
 Provide financial assistance to farmers for procurement of farm machinery and 
implements on individual ownership basis  
 Establish Custom Hiring Centres of location and crop specific farm machinery and 
equipments.  
 Promote appropriate mechanization technologies for crop production, processing, 
value addition and crops bi-product management by way of establishing Village Level 
Farm Machinery Banks in identified villages  
 Promoting Agricultural Mechanization in North Eastern Region by providing 
appropriate agricultural mechanization technologies  
 Promoting awareness on farm mechanization among stakeholders through 
demonstration, capacity building activities and differentiated Information, Education 
and Communication strategies; 
 Conducting performance testing for various farm machines and equipments at the four 
Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institutes (FMTTIs) and authorized testing 
Centres. 
B.2.2 Annual Action Plan Components: 
 
The States will submit the Annual Action Plans towards the following components of SMAM. 
The funds sharing pattern between Centre and States/UTs will be 60:40 for the normal States, 
90:10 for North Eastern and Himalayan States and 100:0 for Union Territories. 
 
S. 
No. 
Component 
Implementing 
Agencies 
Financial 
Assistance 
Eligible 
Beneficiaries 
Broad Criteria for 
Implementation 
1 
Financial 
assistance 
to 
farmers 
for 
procurement 
of 
farm 
machinery 
State 
Governments/ 
UTs 
(i) 
Financial 
assistance @ 
50% of the 
cost 
of 
machine  for 
small 
and 
Farmers 
(i) Beneficiaries 
will be identified 
by 
the 
State/district 
nodal agencies in 

58 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
and 
equipments on 
individual 
ownership 
basis 
marginal 
farmers, 
farmers of the 
Scheduled 
Caste 
and 
Scheduled 
Tribe 
category, 
women 
farmers 
and 
farmers of the 
North Eastern 
States 
and 
Himalayan 
Regions. 
(ii) Financial 
assistance @ 
40% of the 
cost 
of 
machine 
for 
all 
other 
farmers 
(iii) The machine-
wise 
maximum 
permissible 
assistance is 
indicated 
in 
Annexure-
XXV 
a 
transparent 
manner.  
(ii) The 
areas 
of 
having 
lower 
level 
of 
mechanization 
may be focused 
to 
increase 
availability 
of 
appropriate 
region and crop 
specific 
machines. 
2 
Establishment 
of 
Custom 
Hiring 
Centres 
(CHCs) 
State 
Governments/ 
UTs 
(i) Financial 
assistance 
@ 
40% 
of 
the 
project cost for 
the 
projects 
costing up to 
Rs. 250 lakhs  
(ii) The maximum 
permissible 
assistance per 
machine under 
the project will 
be 
the 
maximum 
permissible 
assistance 
indicated 
against 40% in  
Annexure-
XXV 
(iii) Financial 
assistance 
to 
the agriculture 
Rural 
Entrepreneurs 
(Rural youth 
and farmer as 
an 
entrepreneur), 
Cooperative 
Societies 
of 
Farmers, 
DAY-NRLM 
Self 
Help 
Groups 
(SHGs), 
Registered 
Farmers 
Societies, 
Farmer 
Producer 
Organizations 
(FPOs) 
and 
Panchayats 
(i) 
Custom Hiring 
Centres 
of 
location 
and 
crop 
specific 
farm machinery 
and 
equipments, 
Post-Harvest 
Technology 
and 
Value 
addition 
machinery and 
precision 
farming 
technologies 
including Kisan 
Drones will be 
established 
in 
the 
districts 
identified 
for 
implementation 
in 
the 
State 
AAP.  

59 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
graduate 
for 
establishment 
of Kisan Drone 
CHCs will be 
@ 50% of the 
basic cost of 
agricultural 
drone and its 
attachments or 
Rs. 5.00 lakhs, 
whichever 
is 
less. 
(iv) The CHCs will 
be  established 
under 
the 
model 
of 
Credit Linked 
Back 
Ended 
Capital 
Subsidy as per 
the 
broad 
guidelines 
indicated 
in 
Annexure-
XXVI 
 
(ii) The districts in 
State AAP will 
include villages 
having 
low 
farm 
power 
availability and 
large 
area 
under small and 
marginal 
holdings. 
(iii) Any 
business 
model 
including 
the 
PPP 
models 
may be adopted 
for expanding 
the reach of 
mechanization 
through CHCs. 
(iv) It 
will 
be 
necessary 
to 
maintain, 
upgrade 
the 
CHCs 
from 
time to time  
(v) From 
within 
the allocations 
made by the 
States towards 
CHCs/Hi-Tech 
Hubs, 
an 
allocation 
of 
10% 
of 
the 
funds shall be 
earmarked 
towards SHGs 
under 
DAY-
NRLM through 
State 
Rural 
Livelihood 
Mission 
(SRLM) 
and 
through 
Agriculture 
Department of 
the respective 
States. 
(vi) For 
Kisan 
Drone 
CHCs, 
the beneficiary 
should 
have 
passed his tenth 
examination or 
its 
equivalent 
from 
a 

60 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
recognized 
Board 
and 
should have a 
trained 
drone 
pilot 
for 
operation 
of 
drone. 
3 
Establishing 
Village Level 
Farm 
Machinery 
Banks (FMBs) 
State 
Governments 
(i) Financial 
assistance 
@ 
80% 
of 
the 
project cost for 
the 
projects 
costing up to 
Rs. 
30.00 
lakhs/project. 
(ii) The 
beneficiaries 
may take up 
the 
projects 
costing 
more 
than Rs. 30 
lakhs. In such 
cases, 
the 
maximum 
permissible 
financial 
assistance will 
be restricted to 
Rs. 
24 
lakhs/project.   
(iii) The maximum 
permissible 
financial 
assistance 
on 
individual 
machines 
under the farm 
machinery 
projects 
may 
be arrived by 
doubling 
the 
maximum 
permissible 
subsidy 
 
of 
40% 
as 
indicated 
in 
Annexure-
XXV 
(iv) The 
FMBs 
with 
the 
project 
cost 
above Rs. 10 
lakhs will be  
established 
under 
the 
Cooperative 
Societies 
of 
Farmers, 
Registered 
Farmer 
Societies, 
Self 
Help 
Groups, FPOs 
and 
Panchayats 
(i) 
The 
Farm 
Machinery 
Banks may be 
established 
in 
the 
Villages 
having 
low 
level 
of 
mechanization 
and preferably 
in the  most 
vulnerable 
rainfed districts 
identified 
for 
priority 
treatment 
indicated in the  
Report, 
“Prioritization 
of Districts for 
Development 
Planning 
in 
India 
– 
A 
Composite 
Index 
based 
Approach”. 
The 
villages 
under 
Aspirational 
Districts should 
also be given 
preference.  
(ii) From 
within 
the allocations 
made by the 
States towards 
FMBs, 
an 
allocation 
of 
10% 
of 
the 
funds may be 
earmarked 
towards SHGs 
through 
State 
Rural 
Livelihood 
Mission 
(SRLM) 
and 
through 
Agriculture 

61 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
model 
of 
Credit Linked 
Back 
Ended 
Capital 
Subsidy as per 
the 
broad 
guidelines 
indicated 
in 
Annexure-
XXVI 
Department of 
the respective 
States. 
(iii) Farm 
Machinery 
Banks 
may 
provide 
crop 
specific 
mechanization 
services to the 
farmers in the 
region 
including 
processing, 
value addition 
and crop 
by-
product 
management.  
(iv) Women Groups 
may 
be 
encouraged to 
take 
up 
processing,  
value addition 
activities 
through 
the 
FMBs.  
(v) The 
Women 
Self 
Help 
Gropus 
identified under 
Namo 
Drone 
Didi 
Scheme 
should be given 
preference for 
purchase 
of 
Multi-utility 
machines, 
which may also 
be 
used 
for 
drone transport.  
(vi) Not more than 
one tractor may 
be 
allowed 
under 
the 
projects. 
4 
Promotion of 
Agricultural 
Mechanization 
in 
North 
Eastern 
Region 
NER 
State 
Governments. 
(i) For purchase 
of machines 
by 
the 
farmers 
on 
individual 
ownership 
basis, 
financial 
Farmers  
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Beneficiaries 
will 
be 
identified 
by 
the 
State/district 
nodal agencies 

62 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
assistant 
@ 
100% of cost 
of 
machine 
costing up to 
Rs. 
1.25 
lakhs will be 
provided.  
in a transparent 
manner. 
 
(ii) For 
establishment 
of 
Farm 
Machinery 
Banks 
(FMBs), 
financial 
assistance @ 
95% of the 
project 
cost 
for 
the 
projects 
costing up to 
Rs. 
30.00 
lakhs.  
(iii) The 
beneficiaries 
may take up 
the 
projects 
costing more 
than Rs. 30 
lakhs. 
However, the 
maximum 
permissible 
financial 
assistance 
will 
be 
restricted to 
Rs. 
28.50 
lakhs/project. 
(iv) The 
maximum 
permissible 
assistance per 
machine 
under 
the 
Farm 
Machinery 
Bank project 
will 
be 
calculated  by 
multiplying 
the maximum 
permissible 
assistance 
indicated 
against 50% 
Cooperative 
Societies 
of 
Farmers, 
Registered 
Farmer 
Societies, 
Self 
Help 
Groups 
(SHGs), 
FPOs 
and 
Panchayats 
As indicated against 
4.3 

63 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
in Annexure-
XXV by 2 
(Two) 
and 
then 
again 
multiplying 
the same by 
0.95.   
(v) The 
FMBs 
with 
the 
project 
cost 
above Rs. 10 
lakhs will be  
established 
under 
the 
model 
of 
Credit Linked 
Back Ended 
Capital 
Subsidy 
as 
per the broad 
guidelines 
indicated 
in 
Annexure-
XXVI 
5 
Financial 
Assistance for 
Mechanized 
operations   
State 
Governments/ 
UTs 
(i) The financial 
assistance to 
the small and 
marginal 
farmers 
of 
low 
mechanized 
regions will 
be provided 
@ 
2000/ha 
for hiring of 
Drones from 
the 
Custom 
Hiring 
Centres, 
Women 
SHGs.  
(ii) This 
assistance 
will 
be 
available up 
to 2 ha land in 
a year. The 
amount 
of 
assistance 
will 
be 
proportionate 
to the actual 
land 
owned 
by 
the 
farmers.  
Small 
and 
Marginal 
Farmers 
(i) The States shall 
sign necessary 
MoUs 
with 
CHCs 
and 
Women SHGs 
for 
providing 
services 
of 
drones to the 
small 
and 
marginal 
farmers.  
(ii) The 
area 
of 
kisan 
drone 
application 
should 
be 
georeferenced 
and monitored 
online 
and 
financial 
assistance 
should flow to 
the 
farmers 
through DBT 

64 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
2.0 Central Components (100% funded by Central Government): 
 
S. 
No. 
Component 
Implementing 
Agencies 
Financial Assistance 
Broad Criteria for 
Implementation 
1 
Demonstration 
of 
newly 
developed 
agricultural/ 
horticultural/ 
crop 
residue 
management 
machines post-
harvest 
technologies 
and 
Kisan 
Drones 
at 
farmers’ fields. 
FMTTIs, 
State 
identified 
institutions, ICAR 
institutions, ATMA 
institutions, KVKs 
under ICAR/SAUs, 
National 
Innovation 
Foundation (NIF), 
PSUs 
of 
GOI, 
FPOs. 
(i) Depending on the 
requirements, 
the 
implementing 
agencies (except the 
FPOs) 
will 
be 
provided grants @ 
100% of the cost for 
purchase 
of 
machinery 
and 
equipments 
including 
Kisan 
Drones 
for 
conducting 
their 
demonstrations 
on 
the farmers’ fields.  
(ii) The FPOs will be 
provided grants @ 
75% of the cost of 
machines including 
the kisan Drones.  
(iii) The Implementing 
agencies which do 
not want to purchase 
the machines for 
demonstration, will 
hire the machines to 
be 
demonstrated 
from the Custom 
Hiring Centres. In 
such 
proposals, 
financial assistance 
@ Rs. 6000 per 
hectare 
to 
meet 
contingency 
expenditure will be 
provided.  
(iv) The rate of grant to 
meet the contingent 
expenditure will be 
Rs. 
3000/- 
per 
hectare in the case 
of the implementing 
agencies that will be 
provided grants for 
purchase 
of 
equipments 
and 
machines 
for 
demonstration. 
(i) All 
these 
demonstrations 
should 
be 
georeferenced 
and 
properly monitored. 
(ii) All 
the 
demonstrations 
will 
be uploaded on the 
Krishi MApper   
(iii) The 
machines 
procured 
for 
demonstration 
may 
also 
be 
used 
for 
Custom Hiring to the 
farmers at reasonable 
rent. 
(iv) The funds provided as 
contingent 
expenditure may be 
used towards hiring of 
machines along with 
implements/ 
self-
propelled 
machines/Kisan 
Drones, expenditure 
towards 
hands 
on 
training 
and 
miscellaneous 
expenditure such as 
expenditure towards 
transport, 
labour, 
publicity and printing 
of technical literature 
etc. However, these 
funds should not be 
used for recruitment 
of staff, TA/DA of 
staff, 
purchase 
of 
computer, 
video 
camera, vehicle etc. 
or 
for 
any 
construction.  
(v) The 
implementing 
agencies will engage 
Krishi 
Sakhis 
for 
collecting 
and 
uploading 
of 
data/pictures 
of 
demonstration 
and 
geo-plotting/polygon 

65 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
(v) Expenditure 
over 
and above specified 
limits will be borne 
by 
respective 
institutions. 
mapping 
of 
demonstrations 
on 
Krishi MApper. A 
resource fee of Rs. 
100 per hectare will 
be paid to the Krishi 
Sakhis from within 
the contingent funds 
of demonstration. The 
Krishi Sakhis will be 
digitally skilled to use 
the Krishi MApper 
App.  
(vi) The Institutions under 
ICAR, 
SAUs 
and 
other 
Central 
institutions 
may 
submit 
their  
proposals 
directly. 
However, 
the 
institutions 
under 
State 
Governments 
will have to route 
their 
proposals 
through 
State 
Department 
of 
Agriculture/ 
Agricultural 
Engineering. 
 
2 
Skilling in field 
of 
farm 
mechanization, 
post-harvest 
management 
and 
Kisan 
Drones 
FMTTIs, State 
identified 
institutions, ICAR 
institutions, 
ATMA 
institutions, KVKs 
under ICAR/SAUs 
(i) Assistance will be 
available as per the 
Common Norms for 
Skill Development 
Schemes 
of 
the 
Government 
of 
India  as notified by 
the Ministry of Skill 
Development 
& 
Entrepreneurship 
(as may be amended 
from time to time). 
(ii) Depending on the 
requirements 
the 
implementing 
agencies 
will 
be 
provided 
financial 
assistance (100 % 
grant-in-aid) 
for 
purchase 
of 
machinery 
and 
equipments 
for 
conducting training. 
(i) 
The Farm Machinery 
Training & Testing 
Institutes (FMTTIs) 
will organize skill 
development 
programmes 
as 
indicated 
in 
Annexure 
–
XXVII(A) 
and 
XXVII(B). 
(ii) The States may also 
identify 
the 
institutions 
for 
organizing the skill 
development 
programmes 
as 
indicated 
in 
Annexure- 
XXVII 
(B). 
(iii) The skilling on Kisan 
Drones may be taken 
through Remote Pilot 
Training 

66 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Organizations 
(RPTOs). 
(iv) All 
implementing 
agencies will monitor 
the 
outcome 
of 
training in terms of  
employment 
generation, 
self-
employment, 
improvement 
in 
productivity/ 
skills 
etc. 
(v) The 
Institutions 
under ICAR, SAUs 
and 
other 
Central 
institutions 
may 
submit 
their  
proposals 
directly. 
However, 
the 
institutions 
under 
State 
Governments 
will have to route 
their 
proposals 
through 
State 
Department 
of 
Agriculture/ 
Agricultural 
Engineering. 
3 
Testing 
of 
agricultural 
machines 
and 
equipments for 
performance 
evaluation 
FMTTIs 
and 
Authorized Centres 
under 
ICAR/SAUs/State/ 
Central  
Governments 
 
 
(i) The 
implementing 
institutions will be 
provided one time 
grant of Rs. 1.5 
crores each as per 
their proposals for 
augmenting 
the 
facilities 
and 
infrastructure 
for 
testing.  
(ii) Additional grants up 
to Rs. 1.00 Crore 
over and above the 
one time grant may 
be 
provided 
for 
creating additional 
testing facilities for 
testing 
of 
new 
machines as may be 
approved 
by 
DA&FW. 
(i) 
The grants provided 
will not be utilized to 
meet the recurring 
expenditure 
on 
testing activities and 
purchase of vehicles 
etc. 
(ii) 
The FMTTIs will 
test the machines 
and equipments as 
per 
their 
authorization.   
(iii) The 
identified 
institutions as per 
Annexure –XXIX or 
the institutions as 
may be recognized 
in future shall test all 
non-self-propelled 
agricultural 
machines/ 
equipment.  Other 
equipments may be 
tested as per the 
separate 

67 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
authorization issued 
to individual centers 
by DA&FW. 
(iv) The testing charges 
for the machines and 
equipments may be 
as 
fixed 
by 
the 
Department 
of 
Agriculture 
& 
Farmers Welfare. 
(v) 
All the institutions 
shall 
scrupulously 
follow 
the 
Test 
Regulations and all 
other 
guidelines 
issued 
by 
the  
Department 
of 
Agriculture 
 
& 
Farmers 
Welfare 
from time to time 
(vi) The 
Institutions 
under ICAR, SAUs 
and other Central 
institutions 
may 
submit 
their 
proposals 
for 
financial assistance 
directly to DA&FW. 
However, 
the 
institutions 
under 
State Governments 
will have to route 
their 
proposals 
through 
State 
Department 
of 
Agriculture/ 
Agricultural 
Engineering. 
 
Note:  
1. The States may, if they so desire, set aside 25% of budget (including the Central and 
State Share) as flexi funds to be spent on any sub-scheme or component or innovation 
that is in line with the overall aim and objective of the approved scheme. In this regard 
the guidelines for Flexi funds within Centrally Sponsored Schemes of Department of 
Expenditure vide Office Memorandum No. 55(5)/PF-II/2011 dated 6th September 
2016 shall be scrupulously followed.  
2. For the financial assistance for kisan drone, the dones may be supplied as a package 
as indicated in the Operational Guidelines of Namo Drone Didi Scheme. The Kisan 
Drone specification and training syllabus for drone pilot shall also be as per 
Operational Guidelines of Namo Drone Didi Scheme. 

68 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
3. 2.5% of annual outlay of SMAM will be earmarked for incurring administrative and 
other contingent expenses by the States 
 
B.2.3 General Instructions for Smooth implementation of the Scheme: 
(i) 
The manufacturers eligible for supply of machines based on machine quality 
conforming to standard specifications, relevant and valid test report of the 
authorized testing institution and availability of product warranty & after sales 
service infrastructure from the manufacturer etc. shall be empaneled by the States.  
The States shall ensure that the cost of machines are reasonable compared to the 
open market prices of the machines. The manufacturers shall observe transparency 
in selling prices and the product warranty including after sales services intended to 
be provided to the farmers/beneficiaries. The maximum selling prices should be 
displayed on the websites of the manufacturers and also in the dealer’s shop. 
(ii) 
The farmers/beneficiaries will be at their liberty to choose any machine/equipment 
and its variants depending on their requirements and as per their choice from within 
the empanelled manufacturers by the States and may negotiate the final price after 
bargaining with the manufacturer/dealer and the beneficiary will be eligible to get 
the applicable subsidy through DBT.  
(iii) 
In the interest of promoting make in India and Atm-Nirbhar Bharat, it is desired that 
the States should not impose huge amount of Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) and 
Performance Security, as the manufacturers in small scale sector gets deprived of 
their participation in the process carried out by the State Governments for supply of 
machines under the scheme. The Performance Security, if at all necessary, may be 
3-5% of the value of the contract and may be furnished in the form of Insurance 
Surety Bonds, Account Payee Demand Draft, Fixed Deposit Receipt from a 
commercial Bank, Bank Guarantee (including e-Bank Guarantee) from a 
commercial bank or online payment in acceptable form safeguarding the purchasers 
interest in all respects. Insisting on adequate after sales service infrastructure and 
blacklisting of the firms for failing to meet their obligations may also be adopted. 
(iv) 
A comprehensive online system should be developed for implementing the farm 
mechanization programmes in the States and it should have arrangements for data 
sharing on Central portal i.e.  https://agrimachinery.nic.in. The States which does 
not have their online portals will have to be on-boarded on the Central portal. 

69 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
(v) 
Manufacturers/suppliers that have tested their products either from FMTTIs or any 
identified institute by DA&FW will only be eligible for supply of machines. The 
requirement of test report for the agricultural implements and tools costing less than 
50,000 (Fifty thousand) may not be necessary. For such machines, self-certification 
for the desired specification/ quality/ performance of agricultural implements and 
tools may be accepted from manufacturers. However, the test report of the FMTTIs 
or authorized testing institutions may be mandatory for the first time manufacturer 
of such agricultural implements and tools. 
(vi) 
The agricultural implements and tools costing less than Rs. 50,000 (Fifty thousand) 
as at SI. No (v) above covers only hand tools, non-powered horticultural & garden 
tools, animal /manual/ implements required for land preparation/sowing & 
planting/inter-cultivation/harvesting and threshing/ transportation operations, 
tractor drawn conventional/ mechanical implements such as ploughs, harrows, seed 
drills etc. However, a system of random pre/post-dispatch checks of above 
agricultural implements and tools shall be evolved by the State Governments and if 
the situation warrants, randomly picked up samples of such agricultural implements 
and tools shall be tested/ retested from any FMTTI or any authorized testing centre 
of DA&FW for asserting their specifications, performance and quality. 
(vii) 
Every machine costing Rs. 1.00 lakh and above supplied under the scheme shall 
mandatorily be georeferenced. The self-propelled machines costing Rs. 1.00 lakh 
and above such as tractors, self-propelled crop reaper/reaper cum binders etc. 
supplied to individual farmers and Custom Hiring Centres should be installed with 
app based AI-powered telematics kit which can track the live movement & location 
of machine and keep the daily record of work done by the machine. The dashboard 
of the telematics kit shall be available with the beneficiary of the machines/CHCs 
and the district as well as State Nodal officer of the scheme. The telematics kit shall 
be provided by the manufacturers as standard attachment on their machines 
manufactured after 1st June 2023. The establishment of CHCs should be 
georeferenced and it should be mandatorily uploaded on the ‘FARMS’ Mobile App 
(viii) It shall be mandatory that the all the Data of Custom Hiring Centres/Farm 
Machinery capital assets under the scheme including the demonstrations conducted 
shall mandatorily be uploaded on the Krishi Mapper. 

70 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
(ix) 
The Soil Health Card may be necessary for getting the subsidy under the Scheme. 
If the beneficiary do no possess any Soil Health Card, the soil sample may be 
collected from the beneficiary and it may be tested for Soil Health Card generation. 
The expenditure may be adjusted with the subsidy amount of the beneficiary. 
(x) 
The machines supplied under the subsidy programmes should have a standardized 
unique identification code provided on the body of the machine by laser cut through 
methods in such a way that it is clearly identifiable, visible and is tamperproof.  The 
guidelines for providing the serial number are as under: 
 
“GJ/6545/444/2023/0001” 
Manufacturin
State Code 
Manufacturers Centralized 
Implement 
Code 
Year of 
Manufacturin
Serial Number
Machines 
Manufacture
Auto 
generated 
thro
https://agrimachinery.nic.in/ portal  
To be provided by the manufactu
 
(a) The type of letter should be ‘Arial Bold, size of letter should be 25 mm. However, 
depending on the machine design and space constraints for various machines, the 
manufacturers are allowed the font size lesser than the indicated one which can 
be conveniently put on the body of the machine provided that the code is clearly 
identifiable and visible on the machines. 
(b) All the manufacturers have to register themselves on ‘agrimachinery.nic.in’ 
portal and needs to obtain the registration number.  
(c) The agricultural implement/ machinery costing Rs. 1.00 lakh and more should 
have laser cut serial number on the main frame which can be viewed from front 
side of the implement/machinery and the implements/machines on which laser 
cut serial number is not possible, should place of laser cut serial number plate by 
welding it on the main frame which can be viewed from front side of the 
implement/machinery. 
(d) The agricultural implements/machines costing less than Rs. 1.00 lakh should 
have engraved serial number on the location of main frame which can be viewed 
from front side of the implement/machinery. 

71 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
(e) The implements/machines having fiber or plastic body on which laser cutting 
serial number is not possible, such implement/machine should have engraved 
serial number 
(f) The manufacturers those who may exhaust the 4 digit serial number due to their 
higher production capacities for any particular machine, the States may allow the 
manufacturers to use up to 6 digits serial number. 
(g) This unique serial number coding system shall be accepted by all the States and 
there shall not be any State specific coding system. 
(h) Apart from unique identification code, every machine shall also be provided with 
labeling plate firmly attached by riveting, hammer drive screws or welding in a 
conspicuous and readily accessible position on a part which is normally not likely 
to be replaced during use. It shall show clearly and indelibly the information (1) 
Complete name and address of the manufacturer (ii) Make & Model of the 
machine (iii) Type and size of machine (iv) Unique identification code of the 
machine (v) Month and year of manufacture (vi) Required size of prime mover.  
(i) The type of letter should be ‘Arial Bold, size of letter should be 25 mm. However, 
depending on the machine design and space constraints for various machines, the 
manufacturers are allowed the font size lesser than the indicated one which can 
be conveniently put on the body of the machine provided that the code is clearly 
identifiable and visible on the machines. 
(j) All the manufacturers have to register themselves on ‘agrimachinery.nic.in’ 
portal and needs to obtain the registration number.  
(k) The agricultural implement/ machinery costing Rs. 1.00 lakh and more should 
have laser cut serial number on the main frame which can be viewed from front 
side of the implement/machinery and the implements/machines on which laser 
cut serial number is not possible, should place of laser cut serial number plate by 
welding it on the main frame which can be viewed from front side of the 
implement/machinery. 
(l) The agricultural implements/machines costing less than Rs. 1.00 lakh should 
have engraved serial number on the location of main frame which can be viewed 
from front side of the implement/machinery. 

72 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
(m) The implements/machines having fiber or plastic body on which laser cutting 
serial number is not possible, such implement/machine should have engraved 
serial number 
(n) The manufacturers those who may exhaust the 4 digit serial number due to their 
higher production capacities for any particular machine, the States may allow the 
manufacturers to use up to 6 digits serial number. 
(o) This unique serial number coding system shall be accepted by all the States and 
there shall not be any State specific coding system. 
(p) Apart from unique identification code, every machine shall also be provided with 
labeling plate firmly attached by riveting, hammer drive screws or welding in a 
conspicuous and readily accessible position on a part which is normally not likely 
to be replaced during use. It shall show clearly and indelibly the information (1) 
Complete name and address of the manufacturer (ii) Make & Model of the 
machine (iii) Type and size of machine (iv) Unique identification code of the 
machine (v) Month and year of manufacture (vi) Required size of prime mover.  
(xi) 
The manufacturers eligible for supply of machines based on machine quality 
conforming to standard specifications, relevant and valid test report of the 
authorized testing institution and availability of product warranty & after sales 
service infrastructure from the manufacturer etc. shall be empaneled by the States.  
The States shall ensure that the cost of machines are reasonable compared to the 
open market prices of the machines. The manufacturers shall observe transparency 
in selling prices and the product warranty including after sales services intended to 
be provided to the farmers/beneficiaries. The maximum selling prices should be 
displayed on the websites of the manufacturers and also in the dealer’s shop. 
(xii) 
The farmers/beneficiaries will be at their liberty to choose any machine/equipment 
and its variants depending on their requirements and as per their choice from within 
the empanelled manufacturers by the States and may negotiate the final price after 
bargaining with the manufacturer/dealer and the beneficiary will be eligible to get 
the applicable subsidy through DBT.  
(xiii) In the interest of promoting make in India and Atm-Nirbhar Bharat, it is desired that 
the States should not impose huge amount of Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) and 
Performance Security, as the manufacturers in small scale sector gets deprived of 

73 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
their participation in the process carried out by the State Governments for supply of 
machines under the scheme. The Performance Security, if at all necessary, may be 
3-5% of the value of the contract and may be furnished in the form of Insurance 
Surety Bonds, Account Payee Demand Draft, Fixed Deposit Receipt from a 
commercial Bank, Bank Guarantee (including e-Bank Guarantee) from a 
commercial bank or online payment in acceptable form safeguarding the purchasers 
interest in all respects. Insisting on adequate after sales service infrastructure and 
blacklisting of the firms for failing to meet their obligations may also be adopted. 
(xiv) A comprehensive online system should be developed for implementing the farm 
mechanization programmes in the States and it should have arrangements for data 
sharing on Central portal i.e.  https://agrimachinery.nic.in. The States which does 
not have their online portals will have to be on-boarded on the Central portal. 
(xv) 
Manufacturers/suppliers that have tested their products either from FMTTIs or any 
identified institute by DA&FW will only be eligible for supply of machines. The 
requirement of test report for the agricultural implements and tools costing less than 
50,000 (Fifty thousand) may not be necessary. For such machines, self-certification 
for the desired specification/ quality/ performance of agricultural implements and 
tools may be accepted from manufacturers. However, the test report of the FMTTIs 
or authorized testing institutions may be mandatory for the first time manufacturer 
of such agricultural implements and tools. 
(xvi) The agricultural implements and tools costing less than Rs. 50,000 (Fifty thousand) 
as at SI. No (v) above covers only hand tools, non-powered horticultural & garden 
tools, animal /manual/ implements required for land preparation/sowing & 
planting/inter-cultivation/harvesting and threshing/ transportation operations, 
tractor drawn conventional/ mechanical implements such as ploughs, harrows, seed 
drills etc. However, a system of random pre/post-dispatch checks of above 
agricultural implements and tools shall be evolved by the State Governments and if 
the situation warrants, randomly picked up samples of such agricultural implements 
and tools shall be tested/ retested from any FMTTI or any authorized testing centre 
of DA&FW for asserting their specifications, performance and quality. 
(xvii) Every machine costing Rs. 1.00 lakh and above supplied under the scheme shall 
mandatorily be georeferenced. The self-propelled machines costing Rs. 1.00 lakh 

74 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
and above such as tractors, self-propelled crop reaper/reaper cum binders etc. 
supplied to individual farmers and Custom Hiring Centres should be installed with 
app based AI-powered telematics kit which can track the live movement & location 
of machine and keep the daily record of work done by the machine. The dashboard 
of the telematics kit shall be available with the beneficiary of the machines/CHCs 
and the district as well as State Nodal officer of the scheme. The telematics kit shall 
be provided by the manufacturers as standard attachment on their machines 
manufactured after 1st June 2023. The establishment of CHCs should be 
georeferenced and it should be mandatorily uploaded on the ‘FARMS’ Mobile App 
(xviii) It shall be mandatory that the all the Data of Custom Hiring Centres/Farm 
Machinery capital assets under the scheme including the demonstrations conducted 
shall mandatorily be uploaded on the Krishi Mapper/Mobile app developed by 
DA&FW. 
(xix) The Soil Health Card may be necessary for getting the subsidy under the Scheme. 
If the beneficiary do no possess any Soil Health Card, the soil sample may be 
collected from the beneficiary and it may be tested for Soil Health Card generation. 
The expenditure may be adjusted with the subsidy amount of the beneficiary. 
(xx) 
The machines supplied under the subsidy programmes should have a standardized 
unique identification code provided on the body of the machine by laser cut through 
methods in such a way that it is clearly identifiable, visible and is tamperproof.  The 
guidelines for providing the serial number are as under: 
 
B.2.4 Scheme Monitoring 
Mechanization & Technology (M&T) Division of Department of Agriculture & farmers 
Welfare will be responsible for implementing and monitoring of the Scheme as under: 
 
Visit the states regularly and frequently to provide guidance in organizational and 
technical matters. 
 
Help in the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of various interventions in the 
scheme and provide feedback reports  

75 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
 
Compile materials for capacity building, conduct and participate in the promotional 
events such as, workshops/ seminars/exhibitions on different subjects in different 
regions of the country. 
 
Undertake publicity/information campaign to create awareness 
on farm 
mechanization, document and disseminate the success stories. 
 
Assist the State Agencies in concurrent evaluation based on performance indicators 
 
Assess state-wise farm power status, availability and existing gap and identify the 
future requirements 
 
In order to enrich the knowledge base of the technical personnel/progressive farmers 
involved in the scheme, exposure visit/training of technical staff /officers at 
International organizations like IRRI, ICRISAT, CSAM China, NIAE Korea, JICA 
Japan, NTTL USA etc. or any other research organization in farm mechanization 
within the country and abroad would be organized. 
 
2.5% of annual outlay of the Sub-Mission will be earmarked for incurring 
administrative and other contingent expenses towards the above 
 
 
The component wise details of activities to be undertaken under the scheme are given at 
Annexure-(XXV – XXVIII) 
 
 
 
 
 

76 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
B.3 
CRM: 
 
 
 
A large portion of the paddy straw / crop residues are burnt in the field primarily to clear the 
field after the harvest of the preceding crop for the sowing of next crop.  Burning these crop 
residue causes phenomenal pollution problems in the atmosphere and huge nutritional loss and 
physical health deterioration to the soil.  It has been estimated that The burning of one tonne of 
paddy straw releases 3 kg particulate matter, 60 kg CO, 1460 kg CO2, 199 kg ash and 2 kg SO2. 
These gases affect human health due to general degradation in air quality resulting in 
aggravation of eye and skin diseases.  Fine particles can also aggravate chronic heart and lung 
diseases. One ton of paddy straw contains approximately 5.5 kg N, 2.3 kg P2O5, 25 kg K2O, 1.2 
kg S, 50-70% of micro-nutrients absorbed by rice and 400 kg of carbon, which are lost due to 
burning of paddy straw. Apart from loss of nutrients, some of the soil properties like soil 
temperature, pH, moisture, available phosphorus and soil organic matter are greatly affected 
due to burning. 
 
Crop Residue Management Options can be classified as in-situ and ex-situ management options.  
Retaining, incorporating or mulching the crop residues in the field and decomposing using 
consortia of microbes are the two possible in-situ crop residue management options. Baling and 
transporting straw from the field is other feasible ex-situ option when alternate, effective and 
economically viable usage methods are identified and facilities and infrastructure are created. 
 
It is envisaged that appropriate mix of in-situ and ex-situ crop residue management options 
through a holistic approach of providing appropriate solutions, optimally utilizing the existing 
resources and establishing appropriate supply chain through a cluster based approach in the 
vicinity of various industries utilizing the crop residue will help containing the burning of crop 
residues in the open field. 
 
In view of above, the efforts of the States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh 
and NCT of Delhi in addressing the problems of crop residue burning through the interventions 
described hereunder: 
 
B.3.1 Strategy: 
 
To achieve the above objectives, a focused approach of providing appropriate and already 
accepted machines for in-situ management will be adopted. Optimal utilization of already 

77 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
available machines and machines that will be made available to fulfil the gaps will be ensured.  
A supply chain will be established through a cluster based approach in the vicinity of various 
industries utilizing the paddy straw. The supply chain beneficiaries will collect, densify, store 
the paddy straw at desired locations and will make available the same to various users or 
industries as per requirement. Strategic Information, Education and Communication (IEC) will 
also be undertaken with the involvement of all stakeholders for mass awareness of farmers. 
 
I. Financial assistance to farmers for procurement of crop residue management 
machines on individual ownership basis: 
 
(a) 
Implementing Agencies: State Governments/UTs 
(b) 
Identification of Beneficiary: Beneficiaries will be identified by the State/district 
nodal agencies in a transparent manner. The areas of having larger problems of crop 
residue burning may be focused to increase availability of appropriate machines.  
(c) 
Financial Assistance:  The rate of financial assistance will @ 50% of the cost of 
machinery.  The list of machines identified for crop residue management together with 
ceiling limit for subsidy is indicated in Annexure-XXIX 
In case of tractor drawn machines, preference may be given to those beneficiaries owning the 
compatible tractor for operation of the machine. 
 
II. Establishment of Custom Hiring Centres of Crop Residue Management Machines: 
 
(a) 
Implementing Agencies: State Governments 
(b) 
Composition of Custom Hiring Centres: 
(i) 
The machines/equipments for establishing Custom Hiring Centres (CHCs) 
appropriate for the crop residue management will be selected from within the list at 
Annexure-XXIX. 
(ii) Purchase of One tractor of 60 HP & above will be allowed under the project.  
(iii) Each CHC should be provided the machines and equipments for the entire operations 
of crop residue management. 
(iv)  The capacity of the machines may be selected on the basis of area to be covered in 
a cropping season. 
 

78 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
(c) 
Financial Assistance: 
Credit Linked Back Ended Subsidy@ 80% of the project cost for the projects of 
Custom Hiring Centres (CHCs) costing up to Rs. 30lakhs will be available to Rural 
Entrepreneurs (Rural youth and farmer as an entrepreneur), Cooperative Societies of 
Farmers, Registered Farmers Societies, Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) and 
Panchayats. The maximum permissible assistance per machine under the CHC project 
is indicated in Annexure-XXX.  The maximum permissible subsidy for each project 
should not exceed Rs. 24.00 lakhs per project. 
 
The broad Guidelines for Credit Linked Back Ended Subsidy are given in Annexure-
XXXI 
 
III. Establishment of crop residue/paddy straw supply chain: 
The broader objectives of the crop residue/paddy straw supply chain will be as under: 
 
 
Enable better environmental practices for ex-situ management crop residue. 
 
Establishing collection infrastructure, bailing, transportation and handling of large 
amount of crop residue and creation of storage facilities. 
 
Utilizing the paddy straw in different industries utilizing it such as biomass power 
generation units, Biomass co-firing in Thermal Power Plants, Bio-CNG, Bio-Ethanol, etc.  
 
Assured procurement of paddy straw from farmers through the by the paddy straw 
aggregators. 
 
Ensure increase in income (both from the produce and later from the sale of paddy 
residue) for farmers and enhance rural employment and financial inclusion. 
(a) 
Implementing Agencies: State Governments  
(b) 
Financial Assistance: 
 
(i) 
Based on the project proposals, a Credit Linked Back Ended Subsidy  will be 
provided only on the capital cost of machinery and equipment like Higher HP 
Tractor, Cutters, Tedder, Medium to Large Balers, Rakers, Loaders, Grabbers and 
Telehandlers. The broad Guidelines for Credit Linked Back Ended Subsidy are 
given in Annexure-XXXI 

79 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
(ii) 
The projects may be implemented under the bilateral agreement of the end user 
industry and the beneficiary.  The capital subsidy will be released into the Subsidy 
Reserve Fund Account of the concerned borrowers through Direct Benefit 
Transfer (DBT). 
(iii) 
For the project under bilateral arrangement, the financial contribution of each 
stakeholder may be as follows: 
a) Government (jointly by Central and State Governments) will provide 
financial support of 65% up to a maximum limit as indicated in the Annexure-
IV. The Government shall implement the intervention through a bilateral 
agreement between the Beneficiary and Industries and monitor the 
effectiveness with respective State Agriculture Departments to monitor and 
manage the project. The expenditure will be met from the flexi funds of the 
Crop Residue Management Scheme. 
b) Farmer or group of Farmers or Rural Entrepreneurs or Cooperative Societies 
of Farmers or Farmers Producer Organizations (FPOs) & Panchayats will 
contribute the balance at least 10%  and will be the primary aggregator of 
feedstock and direct beneficiary of this PPP model. They will perform the 
feedstock collection targets in line with the volume and quality guidelines of 
the end-use industry/project requirements throughout the life of the 
machinery. 
c) Industry as primary promoter of the project will contribute the balance project 
cost and will act as the Primary consumer of the feedstock collected via 
machinery. Industry will be responsible for overall effective machinery 
deployment via most suitable machinery manufacturers, training of 
beneficiaries, aggregation planning along with volume and quality guidelines, 
on-ground execution of aggregation during post-harvest collection period, 
pricing of feedstock and offtake guidelines. Industry will be primary 
consumer of the feedstock throughout the life of the machinery. 
(iv) 
For projects which are not under the bilateral arrangement of any end user 
industry and beneficiary and the beneficiaries are willing to contribute balance 
project cost,  the financial contribution in such cases may be as follows: 
a) Government (jointly by Central and State Governments) will provide 
financial support of 65% upto a maximum limit as indicated in the 

80 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Annexure-IV. The expenditure will be met from the flexi funds of the Crop 
Residue Management Scheme. 
b) Farmer or group of Farmers or Rural Entrepreneurs or Cooperative 
Societies of Farmers or Farmers Producer Organizations (FPOs) & 
Panchayats will contribute the balance 35% and will be the primary 
aggregator of feedstock. 
(v) 
Financial assistance from the Government will be provided only on the capital 
cost of machinery and equipment and the rest of the capital expenditure and 
required working capital may be arranged by the beneficiary through Bank 
financing. 
(vi) 
The Indicative Capital Expenditure for Setting up Paddy Straw Supply Chain 
(For 3000 MT Paddy Straw per Season and 4500 MT Paddy Straw per Season) 
is given in Annexure-XXXII. However, the maximum allowable cost for each 
machine covered under the project shall be decided by the State Governments. 
For the purpose of financial assistance on 4500 MT paddy straw per season 
projects, the capital cost of project will be limited to Rs. 1.50 Crores/project. 
(vii) 
The machines and equipments and their costs are indicative and beneficiaries 
may have the choice of selection of equipments from within the list as per their 
requirement. The total project cost can only be arrived  based on the proforma 
invoices of the sale of machines. The States also have the flexibility to include 
any machine under the projects as per their requirement. 
(viii)  Purchase of only tractors under the project shall not be allowed. The large 
capacity balers may be replaced with a number of small balers for same 
capacity projects. 
B.3.2 Management:  
The implementation of the intervention is proposed on pilot project basis to support the 
investment planned for ex-situ machinery deployment. The programme will be monitored by 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare with the help of Agriculture Departments of the 
State Government.  However, the management of supply chain is the responsibility of scheme 
beneficiaries’ e.g. Farmers or a group of farmers, entrepreneurs, Cooperative Societies of 
Farmers, Farmers Producer Organizations (FPOs) and Panchayats in association with the 
participating industry. 

81 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
(i) 
For the projects to be implemented under the bi-lateral agreement between the 
Beneficiary and Industries utilizing the paddy straw, an agreement shall be executed 
between the stakeholders to ensure smooth implementation of the interventions keeping 
the interests of the industrial project and beneficiaries interests by addressing measures 
for Risk Mitigation, Default clauses etc., to protect the investment made by all respective 
stakeholders.  
(ii) 
The State Governments shall constitute a project sanctioning committee which shall 
devise a template for submission of project proposal by the beneficiaries. The 
Committee shall also evaluate the project proposals and recommend the proposals for 
approval or otherwise. 
(iii) 
The sample format for the bilateral agreement is enclosed as Annexure-XXXIII and 
the provisions indicated in the sample agreement may be amended as per the 
requirements and mutual consent of the parties.  There may not be requirement of such 
an agreement where the beneficiaries without the involvement of end user industry are 
ready to contribute remaining project cost (Project cost – applicable subsidy) at their 
own. 
 
B.3.3 Information, Education and Communication (IEC) for awareness on crop residue 
management 
 
(a) 
Implementing Agencies: The State Governments shall identify State Institutions, 
SAUs, KVKs, PSUs, ICAR & Central Government institutions for conducting the IEC 
activities and the funds will be provided by the States to these identified institutions 
based on their proposals. 
(b) 
Objectives: (i) Launching Massive information and publicity campaign amongst the 
farmers through coordinated efforts of all stakeholders to mobilize farmers for not 
burning the crop residue. (ii) Conducting capacity building programmes and large scale 
demonstrations of the technologies on the farmer’s fields for speedy adoption of 
technologies by the farmers. 
(c) 
Provisions and Financial Assistance: 
(I) 
Demonstration of crop residue management machines on the farmers’ 
fields: 

82 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
i. 
Depending on the requirements, State Government institutions, KVKs, ICAR 
institutions, Central Government institutions, PSUs, may be allowed purchase 
of machinery and equipments for demonstration. 
ii. 
All demonstrations will be carried out under close supervision of Implementing 
Agency and the demonstrations sites shall be georeferenced and uploaded on 
the State portals. 
iii. 
The machines to be demonstrated shall be identified by the implementing 
agencies. The implementing agencies will be provided full cost of machines to 
be procured and a contingency expenditure @ Rs. 6000/- per hectare will also 
be provided for taking up demonstrations on the farmers’ fields. 
iv. 
All implementing agencies will monitor the outcome of training and 
demonstration in terms of improvement in skills, and adoption of technologies 
etc. 
 
(II) 
Demonstration of Bio-decomposer Technology on farmers’ fields: 
As the application of decomposer in the fields involves preparing and 
multiplying the formulation to a water soluble sprayable form in large quantities 
and then its application in the harvested fields through suitable sprayers, the 
implementing agencies (State Governments, KVKs and ICAR institutions) may 
engage service providers/custom hiring centres having adequate resources after 
following due procedure for engagement of such service providers, for the 
following broader tasks to be carried out: 
(a) 
Conduct large scale demonstrations on the farmers’ fields  
(b) 
Identify the farmers and area for large scale application of bio-
decomposer technology 
(c) 
Geo-referencing of the identified area 
(d) 
Procuring and making available bio-decomposer in required quantity 
(e) 
Provide spraying services of the decomposer at scale through suitable 
sprayers 
(f) 
Advising the farmers to follow irrigation and primary tillage operations 
for completing the protocol of decomposition. 

83 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
(g) 
create awareness and ensure follow through on protocol for pre and post 
spraying operations 
(h) 
Monitoring the fields through satellite and ground observations for 
decomposition of the crop residue and that the fields are not burnt by the 
farmers 
(i) 
Reporting and documenting the entire demonstration programme and its 
outcome. 
The financial requirements on actual basis towards these demonstrations may be 
met by the States from the overall funds made available for crop residue 
management. 
The States may also procure this technology (bio-decomposer) from validated 
suppliers and provide the same to the farmers at free of cost. 
 
(III) 
Capacity Building Programmes on crop residue management: 
a) 
Depending on the requirements, State Government institutions, KVKs, ICAR 
institutions, Central Government institutions, PSUs, may be funded for purchase 
of 
machinery 
and 
equipments 
for 
providing 
training 
to 
farmers/users/stakeholders. 
b) 
An amount of Rs. 6000/- per trainee per week (05 days) will be provided to the 
institutes identified for training to meet the expenses towards manpower, 
boarding/lodging and transport.  This financial assistance will be proportionate to 
the training duration 
c) 
All implementing agencies will monitor the outcome of training in terms of 
improvement in skills, and adoption of technologies etc. 
 
(IV) 
Information and publicity campaigns 
(i) The activities but not limited to the following may be implemented for mass awareness of 
farmers with the involvement of all stakeholders, social organizations and industry associations, 
NGOs etc.: 
(a) 
Advertisements in the electronic and print media and social media platforms. 

84 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
(b) 
Formation of social media groups for creating awareness, sharing benefits of crop 
residue management and relevant information & advisories among the farmers and other 
stakeholders 
(c) 
Radio jingles, State specific Audio-visual clips in local language, Star campaigning etc. 
(d) 
Mobilization of schools and colleges students through essay completion, painting, 
debate etc. 
(e) 
Award for village / Gram Panchayat, role model farmers for achieving zero stubble 
burning 
(f) 
Distribution of attractive publicity materials such as leaflets, pamphlets, placards, 
posters etc. Communication through banners, hoardings, wall paintings etc. at prominent 
locations.  
(g) 
Organizing Gram Sabhas, meetings, functions, Kisan Melas etc. 
(h) 
Special and innovative programs for sensitization and mass awareness through panel 
discussions of farmers, short and long films on Doordarshan/ DD-Kisan and other 
private channels. 
(ii) The financial requirements on actual basis towards these activities may be met by the States 
from the overall funds made available for crop residue management. 
 
The suggestive schedule of IEC activities are indicated below: 
Period  
 
Activities 
Level of 
activity 
Frequency 
April-May  
Preparation of short and long 
films 
/ 
documentaries/ 
publicity materials including 
material for radio and TV 
programs 
- 
- 
April-May 
Preparation 
of 
publicity 
materials such as leaflets, 
pamphlets, 
 placards, posters, banners,   
hoardings etc.  
- 
- 
April to July 
Formulating strategies action  
plans towards  mobilizing the  
farmers through various IEC  
activities 
- 
- 
August-November 
 
Organizing Farmer Awareness 
/demonstration Camps by  
At 
village/ 
cluster level 
02 times 

85 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
organizing Gram Sabhas,  
meetings, functions, Kisan  
Melas etc. 
Block/district 
level  
01 time 
State level  
01 time 
July-November 
 
Organization 
of 
capacity 
building programs by KVKs 
in association with Farmers’ 
Clubs and  
Cooperative Societies 
KVKs 
in 
Punjab 
Haryana, Uttar 
Pradesh 
and 
NCT of Delhi    
Regularly  
Start by 15th April 
intensify during 
September to 
November   
Advertisements in the Print  
Media. 
- 
Weekly 
Start by 15th April 
Intensify during 
September to 
November   
 
Special 
programs 
for 
sensitization 
and 
mass 
awareness 
and 
panel 
discussions of farmers who 
have switched over to crop 
residue 
management 
at 
Doordarshan/ DD-Kisan and 
other private channels live 
telecast. 
- 
Weekly 
in 
normal month, 
twice a week 
during 
intensification 
August to Novemb
 
Radio jingles, State specific 
Audio-visual clips in local 
language, Star campaigning 
(30-60 seconds duration) 
- 
Four times daily
 
 
 
July to December 
 
 
Formation of social media 
groups for creating awareness, 
benefits 
of 
crop 
residue 
management, 
sharing 
of 
relevant 
information 
and 
advisories among  the farmers 
and other stakeholders 
- 
Continuously 
Mobilization of schools and 
colleges 
students 
through 
essay completion, painting, 
debate etc. 
School level  
Monthly 
District level  
 
once in two 
months 
State level  
Quarterly 
December-January
 
Award for village / Gram 
Panchayat for achieving zero 
straw burning 
Block/district levYearly 
 
B.3.4 Other instructions for Smooth implementation of the Interventions: 
 
(i) 
The manufacturers eligible for supply of machines based on machine quality 
conforming to standard specifications, relevant and valid test report of the 
authorized testing institution and availability of product warranty & after sales 
service infrastructure from the manufacturer etc. shall be enlisted and updated on 

86 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
regular basis by the States.  The cost of machines and their variants shall be left to 
be decided by the manufacturers depending on the competitive market forces. The 
manufacturers shall observe transparency in selling prices and the product warranty 
including after sales services intended to be provided to the farmers/beneficiaries. 
(ii) 
Manufacturers/suppliers that have tested their products either from FMTTIs or any 
identified institute by DA&FW will only be eligible for supply of machines. 
(iii) 
The farmers/beneficiaries will be at their liberty to choose any machine/equipment 
and its variants depending on their requirements and as per their choice from within 
the list of empanelled manufacturers by the States and may negotiate the final price 
after bargaining with the manufacturer/dealer and the beneficiary will be eligible to 
get the subsidy amount as may be fixed by the States through DBT.  
(iv) 
In the interest of promoting make in India and Atm-Nirbhar Bharat, it is desired that 
the States should not impose huge amount of Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) and 
Performance Bank Guarantees, as the manufacturers in small scale sector gets 
deprived of their participation in the empanelment process carried out by the State 
Governments for supply of machines under the scheme. The EMD and Performance 
Bank Guarantee, if at all necessary, may be kept at minimum level and proportionate 
the sale volume of the manufacturer or may be done away with and rather other 
measures such as surety bonds, insisting on adequate after sales service 
infrastructure and blacklisting of the firms for failing to meet obligations may be 
adopted. 
(v) 
A comprehensive online system should be developed for implementing the 
interventions in the States having arrangements for data sharing on Central portal 
i.e.  https://agrimachinery.nic.in. 
(vi) 
 Every machine costing Rs. 1.00 lakh and above supplied under the scheme shall 
mandatorily be georeferenced. The self-propelled machines costing Rs. 1.00 lakh 
and above such as tractors, self-propelled crop reaper/reaper cum binders etc. 
supplied to individual farmers and Custom Hiring Centres should be installed with 
app based AI-powered telematics kit which can track the live movement & location 
of machine and keep the daily record of work done by the machine. The dashboard 
of the telematics kit shall be available with the beneficiary of the machines/CHCs 
and the district as well as State Nodal officer of the scheme. The telematics kit shall 

87 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
be provided by the manufacturers as standard attachment on their machines 
manufactured after 1st June 2023. The establishment of CHCs should be 
georeferenced and it should be mandatorily uploaded on the ‘FARMS’ Mobile App 
(vii) 
The guidelines of SMAM will be applicable as mentioned at para X of B.2.3 above 
with regard to the machines supplied under the subsidy programmes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

88 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
B.4 
SH&F 
The Soil Health Cards (SHCs) introduced in the year 2014-15 with objective to assist states in 
promoting Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) through judicious use of chemical fertilizers 
including secondary and micro nutrients in conjunction with organic manures & bio-fertilizers 
for improving soil health and its productivity. This scheme has sub-components like, setting up/ 
strengthening of Soil Testing, Fertilizers/ Bio-fertilizers & Organic fertilizers Quality Control 
Labs, promoting Micro-nutrients, and testing soil samples to issue Soil Health Cards. 
 
B.4.1 Institutional Structure 
SH&F will adopt the following institutional structure 
 
a) National Advisory Committee 
The National Advisory Committee (NAC) under Chairmanship of Secretary (A&FW) to will 
be the policy formulating body giving overall direction and guidance to monitor and review its 
progress and performance. It is empowered to lay down and amend/new changes in operational 
guidelines of Scheme other than those aﬀecting ﬁnancial pattern and Cost Norms. The NAC 
will comprise the following members: 
 
b) State Level Steering Committee (SLSC)   
 
The State Level Steering Committee (SLSC) headed by Chief Secretary constituted under 
PMRKVY will oversee the implementation of Soil Health & Fertility component in respective 
States. The Committee shall submit the Annual Action Plan prepared by the State Nodal 
Department/ Agency to GoI for approval. The committed liabilities & new activities of 
components are to be brought out clearly and distinctly in the AAP approved by the SLSC. 
Proposed allocation should not exceed 125% of tentative allocation under the scheme.  
 
c) Role of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) 
Panchayati Raj institutions are main instruments of village local government which play vital 
role in enhancement of agricultural developments and women participation in local government 
etc. The State Government and other designated implementing agencies to the extent possible 
to ensure active participation of the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in the implementation of 
this scheme. PRIs may also be involved in publicizing the demonstrations and training of 
farmers and in ensuring participation of farmers from nearby areas for widespread 

89 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
dissemination of technology. 
 
B.4.2 Expected Outcome and Interventions: 
 
The Scheme envisages the need based Soil Samples Collection, Testing & Soil Health Cards 
generation of SHC Portal to promote Soil Health Management. It will promote balanced and 
judicious use of plant nutrients. Promotion of integrated nutrient system is expected to reduce 
the consumption of chemical fertilizers. The demand for organic sources of plant nutrient like 
bio-fertilizers, organic manure, vermi-compost, slow release nitrogenous fertilizer like 
Neem/Sulphur coated urea will increase, which in turn improve the soil fertility as well as 
nutrient use efficiency. 
 
Interventions proposed for the Scheme includes development of modalities for soil sample 
collection along with standard sampling norms, quality control in the soil analysis, intensive 
use of ICT for data base management for faster delivery of Soil Health Cards in PPP mode and 
popularizing soil test based INM through ﬁeld demonstrations, training & knowledge sharing 
on farmer’s field. 
 
B.4.3 Component-wise details 
 
I. Soil Samples Collection, Testing and online generation of Soil Health Card on SHC 
Portal: 
 
Soil Health Card is ﬁeld speciﬁc detailed report of soil fertility status and other important soil 
parameters that aﬀect crop productivity. Besides, soil health, it also provides an advisory on soil 
test based use of fertilizers and amendments. Soil Health Card has the information like, status 
of soil fertility, dosage of fertilizer application in crops, soil amendments of saline or alkaline 
soil, recommendation on integrated nutrient management. Diagnostic need based soil health 
assessment of farmer ﬁelds may be taken up periodically to issue Soil Health Cards. The State 
Governments may prepare yearly action plan indicating number of land holdings to be covered 
in the selected districts & number of soil samples to be drawn and ﬁnally total number of 
samples to be drawn and tested. The quality of soil testing results and fertilizer recommendation 
depends upon proper soil sampling. For this, the following scientific norms are prescribed: 
 
 The ideal time for collection of soil samples is between harvests of one crop and sowing/ 
planting of other crop, when fields are vacant. 

90 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
 The sampling depth for field crops should kept 0 to 15 cm. 
 Sample has to be collected preferably with the help of stainless steel tube augur, or 
alternatively with a khurpi /spade or kassi. 
 
 A brief training to the soil sampling staff/students/ farmers’/field extension machinery 
would be necessary to ensure collection of representative soil sample, their labeling and 
transport to the STLs. 
 GPS co-ordinates with Mobile Apps have to be essentially recorded at the time of soil 
sampling which will be downloaded in the STL computer. 
 The need based villages/ farmers will use stratified sampling techniques. Samples will 
be collected from marginal, small and large farms to address variations that arise due to 
different management practices. Within each farm size class, samples will be chosen to 
represent all possible soil fertility variations. 
 
In the new system, samples will be collected with the provision of proper sealing of samples 
with QR Code, geo tagging and mobile selfie. 
 
The need based soil sample collection, analysis and generation of Soil Health Card on SHC 
Portal for farmers will be done by states/UTs with the help of mobile App. The mobile 
application after capturing the above data will scan a blank QR code or bar code which will 
capture the data of farmers and land details and this will be slicked to the sample collected. 
Simultaneously, the farmer would receive an SMS with information about the sample 
collection. The information regarding the farmer will be stored on the cloud. The sample is then 
sent to the nearest ICAR validated soil test lab/unit. The detailed guidelines for mobile 
application to collect the sample are at Annexure-XXXIV.  
 
The mobile application has been linked with Agri Stack. Wherever the Agri Stack is 
implemented, the farmer’s demographic details and land details will be captured through 
farmers ID. It will automatically capture the survey number and will validate the farmer’s 
identity and land details. All the respective Sates, Districts, Villages where Agri Stack is 
existing, States are requested to provide the data of the farmers through API to the technical 
team of Soil Health Card.   
 
Soil sample collection, analysis and generation of Soil Health Card on SHC Portal farmers will 

91 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
be done for which the ﬁnancial assistance @ Rs.300 per sample will be given to the states/UTs. 
The breakup of Rs.300 per sample will be as under- 
 
S. No. 
Activities/ Items 
Revised Cost (in Rs. 
1. 
Soil sample collection, including Sample Kit (Sample bag
6”x4” size, sealing Wax, Thread, QR code, Candle & Match 
etc). 
50.00 
2. 
Engaging Contractual services & training per STL 
40.00 
3. 
For analyzing soil samples:- cost of chemicals, glass ware 
miscellaneous includes gas, filter papers, distilled water etc.
188.00 
4. 
Printing and Distribution of SHC.  
05.00 (Based on Sta
requirements) 
5. 
Demonstration & Awareness on SHC requirement for S
Health & Fertility. 
15.00 
6. 
Maintenance/House Keeping of Lab. 
02.00 
 
Total Cost  
300.00 
 
 
States/UTs are permitted for inter-component flexibility in cost upto 10% in each component 
as mentioned above.   
Demonstration & Awareness component amounting to Rs. 15 will be given by State to Krishi 
Sakhi (SRLM) and ATMA for each soil health card.  
 
The entire activity will be undertaken as per Citizen Charter issued by this Ministry 
(Annexure-XXXV)  
 
 
II. Allotment & monitoring of targets through SHC portal  
 
Scheme will be monitored through revamped portal https://soilhealth.dac.gov.in . State – wise 
targets will set in the portal by Central Admin for soil sample collection as per Annual Action 
Plan of State Government in April month. These targets will be further bifurcated by States to 
their STLs. Sample collection; testing and generation of SHC will be updated on portal on real 
time basis. State wise target for other components will be set in Portal and state will update the 
achievement against the target on daily basis. State and STLs will be provided separate login 
credential to operate the portal. The manuals for the portal is at Annexure- XXXVI 
 
III. Setting up of Village Level Soil Testing Labs (VLSTLs) and Incentive to 
Entrepreneurs : 
Setting of village level soil testing labs will generate employment for rural youth and facilitate 

92 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
quick analysis of soil samples at farm gate level and enhance soil-testing capacity. The Financial 
assistance @ Rs.1.50 lakh-total project cost will be provided to beneﬁciaries, which will be 
shared on 60:40 bases between GOI and states (90:10 in case of NE and Hilly States). There is 
no required of beneﬁciary contribution for purchase of machinery & equipment, glassware and 
miscellaneous laboratory articles to create facilities for analysis of NPK, secondary and 
micronutrients. The guidelines for setting up of Village Level Soil Testing Lab is at  
Annexure-XXXVII. 
 
Financial assistance for setting up of Village Level Soil Testing Labs can be availed by 
Individuals, Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), PACS, Agri-Clinics & Agri-Business 
Centers (AC&ABC), Agri-preneurs, Ex-servicemen, Self Help Groups (SHGs), Farmer 
Producer Companies (FPCs), Farmer Joint Liability Groups, Farmer Co-operative Societies, 
Input Retailers and Schools/Colleges. The State Governments will also allot area/ villages to 
them for sample collection. 
 
Incentives serve as a catalyst to start a dynamic process of entrepreneur’s development. The 
ﬁnancial and promotional assistance provided to the entrepreneurs for boosting up private sector 
development. In order to encourage the entrepreneurs in the scheme for soil testing, the 
incentive @ Rs.20/- per Soil Health Card will be provided to entrepreneurs who have set up 
village level STLs and perform Soil sample collection and testing beyond 300 Samples.  
 
IV. Demonstrations, Training & Knowledge Sharing on Farmer’s Field: 
The utility of Soil Health Card lies in the adoption of recommendations entailed therein by the 
farmers. In the selected villages, ﬁnancial assistance for soil test based nutrient balancing will 
be provided to states for demonstration on farmer’s ﬁeld. Under demonstration, all the required 
fertilizer inputs i.e. fertilizers, bio-fertilizers, micro-nutrients, organic manure and soil 
amendments (Gypsum or Liming material) are to be provided for demonstration of soil test 
based balanced use of fertilizers i.e. Integrated Nutrients Management (INM) with ﬁnancial 
assistance @ Rs.5000/- per demonstration of one hectare. 
 
V. Setting up New Soil Testing Laboratories (Static/ Mobile): 
In order to promote soil test base balanced and judicious use of chemical fertilizers, assistance 
will be provided to set up new static/mobile labs. The financial assistance @ Rs.75 lakhs per 
lab will be provided for purchase of machinery & equipment, chemicals & glass wares, 

93 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
miscellaneous laboratory articles & contingencies for Static/Mobile labs as per indicative list at 
Annexure XXXVIII & XXXIX respectively. The suggested list of equipment’s can be 
changed in special circumstances only with the speciﬁc approval of INM Division.  
 
Involvement of Private Sector- Whereas, normally Soil Testing labs will be setup by State 
Government through state agencies, it is expected that State Government will encourage 
involvement of other agencies such as Private Companies associated with Agriculture 
Extension in some way such as Fertilizer Companies, Agri-clinics, NGOs, Cooperative 
Societies and private entrepreneurs (Agri-entrepreneurs). The State Governments will need to 
announce clear guidelines for involving the private sector agencies in the operation and 
management of the Soil Testing Labs. State Governments are encouraged to announce 
innovative PPP Guidelines for involvement of Private sector for running of these Labs. The 
guidelines should, inter alia, clearly deﬁne all the terms and conditions including the soil testing 
charges to be charged from farmers and the MOU/ Agreement to be signed with these private 
agencies, clear cut monitorable targets. State Governments will monitor and review 
performance of these private sector labs periodically. In proposed system of mobile applications 
Static Labs for soil testing will also be mapped in the portal with their unique ID and Geo-
coordinates. 
 
VI. Strengthening of Soil Testing Labs: 
Many of the existing STLs do not have facilities for micronutrient analysis and the existing 
capacities of analyzing NPK also is not being fully utilized. A onetime grant shall be provided 
to create facilities for analysis of micronutrients such as Zinc, Iron, Copper, Manganese, Boron, 
etc. Normally Existing Static STLs/ MSTLs working under the control of the State 
Governments/UTs will be eligible for strengthening. For strengthening of STLs having no 
micronutrient analysis facility, performance assessment should be made keeping in view the 
existing staﬀ before any assistance is given. Only working STLs should be supported. The State 
Government should carefully study the existing performance level of the STL and whether it 
requires any process change to achieve higher eﬃciencies. Moreover, a system of bench-
marking should clearly be put in place. State Governments are encouraged to announce clearly 
deﬁned and transparent guidelines for taking help of private sector as deﬁned for operation and 
management of existing STL and MSTL, along with strengthening under the scheme. 
 
The one-time financial assistance will be provided for inclusion of modern & faster equipment 

94 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
viz. Intensively Coupled Plasma Spectrophotometer (ICP) @ Rs.65.00 lakh per lab and @ 
Rs.40.00 lakhs per lab for Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS) under the component 
of strengthening of existing soil testing labs. Inductively Coupled Plasma Spectrophotometer 
(ICP)/Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS) and its accessories with required 
chemicals and glassware of standard quality are given in indicative list at Annexure-XL. 
 
Soil labs can also be strengthened to test Fertilizers and Bio-fertilizers. The rate will be 
application as per the existing provision in this regard.  
 
VII. Setting up of new Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories (FQCLs) by State 
Governments: 
The capacity of existing testing facilities is quite inadequate, it is therefore, proposed to setup 
new FQCLs by the State Governments for quality testing with annual analyzing capacity of 
4000 samples each. The one-time ﬁnancial assistance @ Rs.75.00 lakhs per laboratory shall be 
provided for purchase of machinery & equipment, chemicals, glass wares and miscellaneous 
laboratory articles to create facilities for analysis of NPK, secondary and micronutrients as per 
Annexure XLI. 
 
VIII. Strengthening of the existing State Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories: 
In order to check the quality of the fertilizers sold in the country, FQCLs  are working under 
the control of deferent State Governments. Since quality testing is a statutory requirement under 
the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), it is imperative to maintain all the instruments and 
equipment and to ensure supply of quality chemicals and glassware for the analysis. This 
requires time-to-time up gradation and replacement of the equipment. Many of the State 
Laboratories are also facing acute ﬁnancial problem to maintain these facilities. Therefore, in 
order to maintain the high standard of analysis potential, it is proposed to upgrade and 
strengthen the existing FQCLs. 
The one-time assistance will be provided to only those State laboratories, which are functional 
and working well. Financial assistance @Rs.40.00 lakhs per laboratory is to be provided for 
purchase of machinery & equipment, chemicals, glassware and miscellaneous laboratory 
articles as indicated at Annexure XLII. 
 
 
 

95 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
IX. Setting up of Bio-fertilizer & Organic-fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories: 
For setting up of Bio-fertilizers & Organic-fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories assistance as 
Grant-in-Aid shall be provided up to maximum limit of Rs.85.00 lakhs for new laboratory to 
State Governments/UTs. Details of equipment machinery are given at Annexure XLIII. 
X. Strengthening of existing BOQCL Laboratories: 
 
For existing Bio-fertilizers and Organic-fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories established by 
State Government assistance shall be provided as Grant-in-Aid up to a maximum limit @ 
Rs.45.00 lakhs per lab for their strengthening in terms of equipment’s/instruments etc. Any of 
the equipment’s shall be the admissible items for strengthening given at Annexure XLIV. 
 
XI. Promotion of Micronutrients: 
Intensive agriculture is experiencing widespread deﬁciency of micronutrients particularly of 
zinc, iron, manganese, boron, etc. Therefore, promotion of use of micronutrients as per Soil 
Health Card recommendation in the deﬁciency areas @ Rs.500 per ha would be given. 
 
XII. Reclamation of Problem Soils: 
Based on recommendation of NITI Ayog, the sub-scheme ‘Reclamation of Problem soils’ 
which was earlier in RKVY-RAFTAAR has been transferred and kept as sub component with 
Soil Health Management (SHM) scheme. Further, the Soil Health Management (SHM) has been 
merged as Soil Health & Fertility component with RKVY-cafeteria scheme. 
 
 The ﬁnancial assistance will be provided as per details given below: 
 
S. No. 
Activity 
Financial Assistance per 
I 
For Gypsum/ Lime application, Green manuring and Bunding in 
a. Acidic soils 
Rs.0.10 lakh 
b. Alkali soils 
Rs.0.20 lakh 
II 
For Saline Soils by sub surface drainage in 
a. Alluvial soils 
Rs.0.65 lakh 
b. Heavy textured soils 
Rs.1.25 lakh 
 
 
XIII. New Initiatives (Research & Development): 
 
Under this component, R& D Initiatives can be under taken either through States or through 
ICAR or other research institutes. Setting up of command centres for Soil Health and Fertility 
scheme is also allowed under this component.  

96 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
 
 
XIV. NABL Accreditation / Recognition of Lab- 
 
In order to ensure quality of labs, the NABL accreditation / recognition of Soil and Fertiliser 
labs are mandatory. State to go for NABL Recognition of soil testing labs in first phase and 
after that NABL Accreditation will be undertaken. State has to go for NABL accreditation of 
all Fertiliser Labs. For NABL accreditation, Rs. 1 lakh under the scheme will be provided. For 
NABL recognition of labs, amount will be provided as per actual or Rs. 1 Lakh whichever is 
less.  
 
B.4.4 Support to School Soil Health Programme- 
 
Under the scheme labs will be set up in identified schools by the Government of India in 
consultation with Department of School Education and Literacy and Tribal Affairs.  Funding 
will be arranged as per the labs cost either from the scheme or from the fund arranged from the 
outside agency like NABARD etc. States will cooordiante the programme with identified 
schools, ATMA, KVKs and SRLM Krishi sakhi for training, soil sample collection, testing, 
generation of Soil health card and organizing Gram Sabha wherein Students will give awareness 
to farmers about the recommendation of Soil Health Card. Recurring cost for labs setup in 
schools for reagents will be met from the scheme or from the fund arranged from schools or any 
outside agency like NABARD.  
 
 
 
B.4.5 Support to RAWE Programme- 
 
Under RAWE programme of ICAR, support will be given under the scheme to SAUs graduates 
to collect soil samples from farmer’s field, testing in labs of SAUs, KVKs or State Government 
Labs. Graduates will also educate farmers about recommendation of  Fertilsers as per soil health 
card, once the SHCs are generated.  
 
B.4.6 Awareness to farmers through Krishi Sakhi and ATMA Network- 
 
 As a part of the Convergence Initiative, between the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer Welfare 
and Ministry of Rural Development a joint initiative i.e Krishi Sakhis Training Programme to 
certify 70,000 Krishi Sakhis as “Para-Extension Workers” Krishi Sakhis has been initiated to 
play a pivotal role in implementing schemes like NMNF, Bio Resource Centres, PMFBY, etc.  
 

97 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Krishi Sakhis, women from villages identified by SRLMs, will be trained to bridge the gap in 
rural agricultural services with their innate potential and firm rooting to farming & villages. 
These will become para-extension workers, community resource persons for creating awareness 
and building capacity of farmers and also acts as a link between farmers, KVKs, Agriculture 
and Allied Departments. They will act as key resources, guiding farmers to access the benefits 
of these initiatives. They would carry out awareness generation meetings on Natural Farming, 
Soil health Management and Testing as part of Janbhagidari.  
 
Under the scheme, the fund for awareness generation will be used through Krishi sakhi and 
ATMA network. The fund of Rs. 15 out of the Rs. 300 earmarked for each soil health card will 
be provided to Krishi Sakhi and ATMA network. The awareness will be spread to farmers 
individually or through farmers mela wherein three activities will be undertaken i.e. (i) 
generation awareness about importance of soil health card. (ii Advisory before sample 
collection. (iii) Advisory after generation of soil health card. 
 
B.4.7 IMPACT ASSESSMENT, MONITORING, PERIODIC EVALUATION AND 
REPORTING: 
 
The Scheme envisages coordinated approach for monitoring with active involvement of 
implementing agencies, beneﬁciaries and other stakeholders. A combination of periodic desk 
review, field visits, and web-based mechanism will be adopted for releasing of funds, physical 
and ﬁnancial progress and monitoring the progress of Scheme interventions at National level 
by INM Division of the DA & FW. INM Division may evaluate eﬃcacy of this Scheme through 
a "third party". The agency will assess the eﬃcacy, performance, outcome and shortcomings of 
the Scheme and recommend suitable corrective measures. Information and communication 
technology will be deployed extensively for ensuring transparency in the implementation 
process and effective monitoring of the Scheme. 
 
 
 

98 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
B.5 
PKVY 
 
“Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)” aims at development of sustainable models of 
organic farming through a mix of traditional wisdom and modern science to ensure long term 
soil fertility build-up, resource conservation and helps in climate change adaptation and 
mitigation. It primarily aims to increase soil fertility and thereby helps in production of healthy 
food through organic practices without the use of agro-chemicals. It also aims at empowering 
farmers through institutional development using clusters approach not only in farm practices 
management, input production, quality assurance but also in value addition and direct marketing 
through innovative means.  
 
Participatory Guarantee System under PGS-India programme was taken up as the key approach 
for quality assurance. Under the scheme farmers will have option to adopt any form of organic 
farming in compliance of PGS-India standards.  
 
B.5.1 INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK AT NATIONAL, STATE AND DISTRICT 
LEVEL 
 
I. National Level 
I.(a) 
National Advisory Committee (NAC) 
The National Advisory Committee (NAC) under Chairmanship of Secretary (DA&FW) will be 
the policy-formulating body giving overall direction and guidance to the Mission and monitor 
and review its progress and performance. The composition of the NAC is given below: 
 
Secretary, Agriculture, Cooperation& Famers Welfare 
(A&FW) 
Chairman 
Secretary, MOFPI 
Member 
Secretary, MSME 
Member 
Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor, DA&FW 
Member 
Additional Secretary (INM), DA&FW 
Member 
Additional Secretary (Panchayati Raj) 
Member 

99 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Additional Secretary (Rural Development) 
Member 
Representative from Department of Agriculture Research 
& Education 
Member  
Joint Secretary (NHM) 
Member 
Joint Secretary (Crops) 
Member 
Joint Secretary (NRM & RFS) 
Member 
Joint Secretary (DOF) 
Member 
Joint Secretary (INM) 
Member Secretary 
Representative of State Governments 
Associate members on rotation 
basis 
 
NAC may invite 3-4 states as associated members in each meeting on rotation basis. NAC will 
meet at least once in six months. 
 
I.(b) 
Executive Committee (EC): 
Executive committee will be headed by Additional Secretary (INM). It will comprise of the 
following Members: 
 
Additional Secretary (INM), DA&FW 
Chairman 
Joint Secretary (Department of Fertilizers) 
Member 
Joint Secretary (INM) 
Member Secretary 
Joint Secretary (MOFPI) 
Member  
Joint Secretary (MSME) 
Member  
Joint Secretary (Panchayati Raj) 
Member 
Joint Secretary (Rural Development) 
Member 

100 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
DDG (NRM), ICAR, Agriculture Commissioner, 
Horticulture Commissioner, ADC (INM), Director, 
NCOF and Director, CFQC&TI 
Expert Members 
 
During the Annual Action plan approval meetings, the State Secretary of Agriculture/ nodal 
department shall be co-opted as member of the E.C. 
 
EC will oversee activities of the Scheme and approve Action Plans of various states 
in accordance with the prescribed norms. 
 
EC is empowered to reallocate resources across States and components  
 
EC will meet at least once every quarter. 
INM Division in DA&FW will Oversee dissemination, implementation, monitoring and 
evaluation of various interventions in the mission and provide feedback reports to the NAC and 
EC. 
 
I.(c) 
National Centre of Organic and Natural Farming (NCONF) 
NCONF being the secretariat for PGS-India programme shall be the monitoring body for PGS 
certification programme including authorization of RCs, selection of NABL accredited labs and 
random surveillance through the RCONFs. It will provide technical trainings to state 
Government officers on organic crop and livestock management as per PGS standards. it will 
have following functions: 
 Monitoring of functioning of Support agencies& implementation of the scheme in states 
as directed by INM Division from time to time.   
 Management and maintenance of data, MIS development, report generation and digital 
surveillance on group activities on PGS certification through PGS portal 
 
I.(d) 
Project Management Cell (PMC) in INM Division will function under JS (INM). 
Consultants in organic farming management, PGS certification and agri-marketing as 
programme Manager, Senior Programmers, Technical Assistants, and supporting staff will form 
part of the PMC. 
 
I.(e) 
Project Management Unit (PMU) to hand hold states in capacity building, facilitate 
convergence with different schemes, handhold developing clusters for market linkages, 

101 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
branding and linking clusters and FPOs with organic agri-value chain professional Project 
Management Units (PMU) shall be hired on contract/outsourcing basis. The functions of the 
PMC and PMU are given at Annexure-XLVII. 
 
II. State Level 
II.(a) The State Level Executive Committee (SLEC): 
Agriculture Production Commissioner/Principal Secretary 
Government 
Chairman 
Commissioner (Agriculture)/ Director (Agriculture) 
Member Secretary 
Commissioner (Horticulture)/ Director (Horticulture) 
Member 
Commissioner (Panchayati Raj) 
Member 
Commissioner (Rural Development) 
Member 
Representatives 
of 
SAUs/ICAR//NCOF/other 
line 
Departments 
Expert Members 
Lead Farmers  
Expert Members 
 
The above SLEC is only indicative. States can choose to set up their own SLEC/already 
existing structures as per the need and availability under information to GoI. 
The SLEC will oversee the implementation of scheme’s components of the respective States 
through regular meetings with the nodal and other line Departments. It will also provide inputs 
to the Executive Committee for appropriate policy formulation and post facto approval, if 
required.   
II.(b) State Project Management Team (PMT): States can engage consultants, technical 
assistants at state and district level having technical and administrative expertise for providing 
technical guidance and effective monitoring of the scheme implementation. States can decide 
the number based on their requirements at State and District level. Financial support for the 
same will be obtained from 2.5% administrative costs provided to the States.  
II.(c) Support Agencies: States can implement the programme through their own staff or can 
engage /outsource programme implementation through professional support agencies 
empaneled by the DA&FW through NCONF. Essential qualifications for Support Agency may 
be seen at Annexure-XLVIII. Support agencies shall be required for the following two-fold 

102 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
functions:  
 Implementation of Cluster formation, capacity building including exposure visits, 
trainings, deployment of manpower, management of entire programme implementation 
including data management, handholding to groups and clusters, facilitating value 
addition and marketing of PGS certified produce.  
 PGS Certification endorsement, physical verification and issue of certificates including 
sample collection and analysis for residue analysis.  
 While any support agency fulfilling the prescribed criteria/qualifications and empaneled 
by the NCONF can take up the functions as listed at (A), States shall engage already 
registered Regional Councils (RCs) for functions as listed at (B).   
 States need to ensure that PGSI RCs authorized by NCONF are hired only for PGS 
certification activity and support agencies empaneled by NCONF for cluster 
development, capacity building and handholding including PGS surveillance, peer 
appraisal support and documentation on PGSI portal. 
 Roles and responsibilities of Support Agency in detail is at Annexure-XLIX 
 Eligible Criteria for Regional Councils is given at Annexure-XLX 
 Roles and responsibility of Regional Councils is given at Annexure-XLXI 
 
III. District Level 
III.(a) The indicative structure for District Level Executive Committee (DLEC) is as follows; 
states can choose their own setup under intimation to GoI 
 
Collector 
Chairman 
Joint Director/Deputy Director (Agriculture) 
Member Secretary 
District Agriculture/Horticulture/Soil Conservation 
officer 
Member 
Representative of (PR, RD, Health, Education of 
others) 
Member 
Representatives 
of 
SAUs/ 
KVKs/ 
other 
line 
Departments 
Expert Members 
 

103 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
III.(b) DISTRICT LEVEL PROJECT MANAGEMENT TEAM: DPMT will be set up for 
implementation and monitoring of programme at District level. 
 
B.5.2 CRITERIA FOR SELECTION OF AREA AND FARMERS 
For selection of areas/ Farmers’ groups the following will be taken in to consideration: 
 Organic farming under PKVY will be promoted preferably in hilly, tribal and 
rain-fed areas.  
 Cluster approach will be adopted in large patches of up to 500 ha area in plain 
areas and 200 ha in hilly areas. 
 
 Cluster chosen shall be in contiguous patch, as far as possible, may be extending 
over few adjacent villages (but not over large areas in sparsely distributed 
villages). 
 Formation of Gram Panchayat based Farmer Producer Organizations will be 
encouraged or already existing FPOs will be promoted under the scheme. 
 In a cluster, there should be maximum number of small and marginal farmers. 
Women farmers/ SHGs should be given preference. 
 Success in marketing shall be one of the key component taken up for outcome 
evaluation along with other indicators such as soil health improvement, reduction 
in cost of cultivation etc. 
 
B.5.3 Formation of FPOs 
Efforts should be made to ensure that all PKVY clusters are federated into Farmer Producer 
Organization (FPOs). For this, funds can be leveraged from 10,000 FPO scheme of DA&FW.  
 
States while preparing Annual Action Plans can indicate their demand for FPOs. DA&FW in 
turn will allot necessary quota of FPOs for PKVY clusters through any of the designated 
Implementing Agency. States can collaborate these Implementing Agency and identify 
CBBOs to take up FPO formation activity.  
 
B.5.4 Pattern of Assistance 
 The project is to be executed over a period of 3 years, every year audited report 
(GFR 19-A) duly signed by Chattered Accountant along with physical report is to 
be submitted to DAC&FW, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Govt. of 
India. State that requires additional time to implement the project, beyond 3 years 

104 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
may seek prior permission before the end of the project period during first 2 years 
subject to the condition that they should not exceed the overall per hectare and per 
farmer cost ceilings. 
.  
 Funds for certification reimbursement under individual farmers and small farmer 
groups away from PKVY clusters will be provided as reimbursement directly to the 
certification agencies within the ceiling prescribed at S. No. 15-B (3&4) of these 
guidelines.  
 
B.5.5 MONITORING AND EVALUATION 
 At the national level regular monitoring of the scheme will be done by NCONF, 
RCONFs and National Project Management Units (PMUs). Monitoring formats will be 
developed for the same.  
 At State and district levels also the Project Management Units engaged for the purpose 
will do regular monitoring of the implementation of the scheme.  
 Information and communication technology will be deployed extensively for ensuring 
transparency in the implementation process and effective monitoring of the programme. 
 A dedicated MIS have been developed to capture the information from planning of 
project, approval, execution to progress report. Timely data uploading into the MIS 
portal is mandatory and shall form the basis for progress evaluation while considering 
the requests for fund releases 
 States will send quarterly progress reports to MIS and in hard copy also. 
 Geo-tagging: The clusters taken up under PKVY will be geo tagged for monitoring 
purpose as well as for facilitating marketing mechanism based on the crops grown. 
 DA&FW will evaluate efficacy of this Scheme through a "third party". The agency will 
assess the efficacy, performance, outcome and shortcomings of the Scheme and 
recommend suitable corrective measures. Concurrent, midterm and final evaluations 
will be conducted by DAC to incorporate midterm corrections and final evaluation of 
the scheme implementation. 
 States shall also take up third party based concurrent, midterm and final evaluations 
from time to time.   
 
 
 

105 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
B.5.6 JAIVIK KHETI PORTAL 
A dedicated   portal for organic farming acting as both a knowledge platform as well as 
marketing platform has been developed. Details of farmers involved in Organic farming, input 
supplier, certification agency (PGS), and marketing agencies will be available for smooth 
implementation from production to marketing. PKVY/PGS groups can take the advantage of 
this portal for capacity building, technical know-how, communicating with marketing channels/ 
other groups and direct marketing of their produce to prospective buyers and consumers. 
B.5.7 FORMATION OF GROUP AND CLUSTERS 
Formation of Groups: A group of farmers having a total area of 20 ha, in as far as possible, in 
contiguous patch within a village or closely located villages shall be considered a PKVY/PGS 
Group. A group shall comprise minimum 20 farmers (may be more if individual holdings are 
less). All PGS group requirements for PGS certification shall be taken up by this group (called 
local group in PGS manual). 25 such groups covering 500 ha area shall constitute one “Cluster”. 
Formation of Clusters: State Government shall identify the target PKVY/PGS Groups covering 
500 ha area for formation of clusters. The group of clusters should be identified preferably in 
the existing FPO areas. Creation of new FPOs shall be taken up funds for FPO formation shall 
be leveraged through convergence from 10,000 FPO scheme of Govt of India 
a. PKVY farmer organizations in respective clusters shall initiate necessary activities for 
formation of FPO for all postharvest activities such as collection and aggregation of 
produce, primary processing including washing, cleaning, grading, packing and 
branding & marketing of the organic produce within six months of cluster formation. 
b. Farmers in a group can avail benefit to a maximum of two ha as per provision of PKVY, 
however the entire land of farmer could be allowed in the cluster without extending any 
additional support to the rest of the area and the same can be facilitated by the service 
provider for certification by the group and endorsed by the Regional Council without 
any extra cost involvement for data management and certification.  
c. For mobilization of farmers in groups and clusters, their capacity building, day-to-day 
handholding in standards implementation, assisting farmers in peer appraisal, 
documentation, data management and data uploading, services of support 
agencies/facilitation agencies empaneled by NCONF may be used. 
d. In cases where individual willing farmers or small farmer groups are interested to join 
the scheme and are located at distance from new/ existing PKVY clusters or large 

106 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
farmers that have not been included in the groups, then such farmers will also be 
considered as an extension of the group/ clusters and will be supported only for 
certification under component 14-B (3 & 4) PGS Certification through Regional 
Councils. Farmers will also be free to adopt third party certification under NPOP. States 
need to ensure that such farmers are taken into consideration for capacity building 
activities and market linkages. Methodology for providing certification assistance to 
such farmers is given at Annexure XLXIII. 
e. In cases where states are willing to bring traditionally organic/ default organic area (such 
as in hills, islands or in tribal or desert belt) without any crop/ commodity focus and 
want to declare the entire identified traditional organic areas as organic with 
certification, then all the farmers in the contiguous area in a village shall be considered 
as cluster. Such clusters will be supported only for certification under the component, 
14-B (3 & 4) PGS Certification through Regional Councils.  States need to ensure that 
such farmers are taken into consideration for capacity building activities and market 
linkages. Methodology for providing certification assistance to such large contiguous 
clusters is given at Annexure XLXIII. 
 
B.5.8 CAPACITY BUILDING 
After formation of a cluster, state Government in consultation with Support agency shall draw 
up a strategy for capacity building of farmers on organic farm management, organic input 
production and use, organic approaches for pest management, adoption of PGS standards in 
field practices, PGS certification procedures at group level documentation requirements for 
PGS and peer appraisal procedures through trainings, exposure visits and on-hand data 
management systems for data uploading.  
Every year a minimum of 3 trainings shall be done at a cluster level, covering all the groups. In 
cases, where cluster is spread over large area (as in hills), trainings may be done at group level 
comprising members from 3 groups. In first year farmers shall also be exposed to PGS 
certification systems through exposure visits to existing PGS groups. 
For mobilization of farmers in groups and clusters, their capacity building, day-to-day 
handholding in standards implementation, assisting farmers in peer appraisal and 
documentation and data management and data uploading necessary manpower shall be 
deployed by the support agency 

107 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Training of Officers /Executives of PKVY Team: Officers/Executives of PKVY Team, 
members of PMUs at different levels, and Regional Councils, to be trained on Sustainable 
Agriculture System and Governance Management of FPOs/PCs. 
 
B.5.9 INCENTIVES TO FARMERS 
For organic conversion and on-farm and off-farm inputs 
Financial assistance to farmers shall be provided as incentive for eco-system service and for 
procurement/ management of organic inputs. Necessary funds under the head shall be released 
directly to the farmer beneficiaries as Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) in their bank accounts. 
On-farm inputs can be like composting, green manuring etc. and Off-farm inputs like organic 
seeds, manures, vermi composts, bio fertilizers, bio pesticides, neem formulations, PROM, 
botanical and physical and biological plant protection agents etc. can be considered.  
States can issue necessary guidelines and suggest inputs as recommendatory measures. Farmers 
can choose inputs out of the recommendations as per their choice. In any case farmers should 
not be forced to buy the recommended inputs by the implementation Department and 
professional support agencies. Farmers will also be free to utilize the assistance fully for 
creation of on-farm input production infrastructure. 
 
B.5.10 MARKETING AND PUBLICITY   
States will prepare plans and programme for such activity. Efforts should focus in local nearby 
areas for marketing through weekly bazaars/ haats or by supporting the FPO in opening an 
outlet. Efforts should be made to develop at least one marketing outlet in each of the 
cluster/FPO. 
 
Components and Financial break up of components for 500 ha organic farming clusters 
under PGS Certification (Target 6 lakh ha) 
 
 
Sl  
No. 
Component 
Year 1 
Year 2 Year 3 Total cost 
ha for 3 ye
Total cost  
of 20 ha 
for 
3 
years (Rs 
in lakh) 
Total 
cost  
of 500 ha 
for 3 years 
(Rs in lakh) 
1. 
Value 
Chain 
Institutional 
Development 
 
 
 
1.1 
Cluster 
formation 1500 
1500 
1500 
4500 
0.90 
22.50 

108 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
and 
Capacity 
building including 
exposure visits, and 
trainings of field 
functionaries 
1.2 
Deployment 
of 
manpower 
and 
management 
cost 
for implementation 
of 
programme 
including 
data 
management 
and 
uploading 
1500 
1500 
1500 
4500 
0.90 
22.50 
2 
Value 
Chain 
Production 
 
 
0 
2.1 
Certification (PGS 
or NPOP) 
1000 
1000 
1000 
3000 
0.60 
15.00 
2.2 
Incentive to farmers 
as DBT 
5000 
5000 
5000 
15000 
3.00 
75.00 
3. 
Value 
addition, 
marketing 
and 
publicity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1 
Support 
for 
marketing, common 
packaging, 
branding, 
space 
rent, transport etc 
1000 
1500 
2000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4500 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.90 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22.50 
3.2 
Value 
addition 
infrastructure 
creation 
through 
FPC/ FPO case to 
case basis* 
3.3 
Brand 
building, 
trade 
fairs, 
exhibitions, 
local 
publicity, 
organic 
fairs/ melas, local 
marketing 
initiatives, 
participation 
in 
national trade fairs 
 
Total for Cluster 
development 
10000 
10500 
11000 
@ Rs 
31500/ha 
6.30 
157.50 
 
 
 
 

109 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
B.6 
RAINFED AREA DEVELOPMENT (RAD) 
 
To main stream development of rainfed are as in a sustainable manner, Rainfed Area 
Development (RAD) Scheme was made operational from 2014-15 in the country as a 
component of National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA). Rainfed Area 
Development (RAD) aims at promoting sustainable agriculture production through adaptation 
of agricultural climatic zone wise Integrated Farming System (IFS) models developed by Indian 
Council of Agriculture research (ICAR). RAD aims at promoting location specific improved 
agronomic practices through soil health management, enhanced rain water use efficiency, 
judicious use of chemicals, crop diversification and progressive adoption of crop-livestock-tree 
farming systems in an integrated approach. 
The scheme will adopt an area based approach for development and conservation of natural 
resources along with farming systems. This component has been formulated in a ‘watershed 
plus framework’ to explore potential utilization of natural resources base/assets 
available/created through watershed development and soil conservation activities/interventions 
under MGNREGS, PMKSY-WDC, etc. A cluster based approach of 20 ha. (contiguous or non-
contiguous in difficult terrain with a close proximity in a village/adjoining villages) would be 
developed to derive noticeable impact of convergence encouraging local participation and for 
future replication of the model in larger areas. It will introduce appropriate farming systems by 
integrating multiple components of agriculture such as crops, horticulture, livestock and fishery 
with agro based income generating secondary agriculture activities and value addition. 
Farming Systems recommended by ICAR and successful findings of NICRA flag ship project 
shall also be considered in development of integrated project plan. Since millets can grow under 
adverse climatic conditions on marginal poor soils with little inputs and are tolerant to drought 
and resistant to pests and diseases, they can also be part of broader farming strategy to adopt to 
increasingly harsh growing conditions brought by climate change.  Also, reducing over-reliance 
on more commonly grown crops with high input use thus fostering more diverse diets and 
promoting food security and nutrition. Besides millets, pulses and oilseeds are also climate 
resilient and to further boost the vegetable oil production in the country, farming systems that 
are envisaged to promote are mainly based on PMO (Pulses, Millets and Oilseeds)  
 
B.6.1 Salient features: 
 RAD promotes enhancing soil productivity through crop diversification and crop 

110 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
rotation increasing soil cover (mulching) periods which is important to enhance organic 
matter of the soil. 
 Expanding protective irrigation from rain water source through efficient water 
management techniques that is required to secure rainfed crops in times of short interval 
droughts. 
 Encouraging indigenous seeds with better adaptability while ensuring its quality, 
diversity and timely availability for climate resilience. 
 Location specific agronomic innovations while enhancing farmers’ knowledge and 
management skills towards developing regenerative integrated farming systems. 
 Appropriate small farm mechanization (small machines and implements for women) for 
ensuring timely operations and reducing drudgery of woman labour. 
 Development and strengthening of FPOs to deal with multiple and diverse commodities 
in small quantities and varied quality. 
 Strengthening support systems for Extensive Livestock Systems (health care, breeding, 
drinking water, fodder in commons, etc.) 
 Promote fisheries in rainfed water bodies through institutionalized support systems. 
 Integrated value chain support systems to realize growth potential in pulses, millets and 
oilseeds based farming production systems including infrastructure and processing 
facilities – focus on local markets. 
 j. Risk minimization, resilience building and enhancing private investment.  
 
B.6.2 Strategy: 
 
     To achieve the objectives, RAD will have following multi-pronged strategy: 
i. 
Promoting integrated farming system covering crops, livestock and tree plantation 
(horticulture and/or agroforestry) based composite farming for enhancing livelihood 
opportunities, ensuring food security and minimizing risks from crop failure through 
supplementary/ residual production systems; 
ii. 
Popularizing resource conservation technologies (both on-farm and off-farm) and 
introducing practices that will support mitigation efforts in times of extreme climatic 
events or disasters like prolonged dry spells, floods etc. 
iii. 
Promoting effective management of available rain water resources and enhancing water 

111 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
use efficiency through application of technologies coupled with demand and supply side 
management solutions;  
iv. 
Interventions on Agriculture Extension shall be emphasized upon for capacity building, 
awareness generation, information support, pooling resources together through 
convergence etc. Capacity building for improved agronomic practices through extension 
programs for higher farm productivity, improved soil treatment, increased water holding 
capacity, judicious use of chemicals/energy, enhanced soil carbon storage etc. are key 
to the success of the program. 
v. 
Selection of rain-fed/dry-land areas: State Government shall identify the priority blocks 
for undertaking the rainfed area development in an integrated approach. Priority shall 
be given to the following areas under the scheme; 
 
Gram Panchayat/Blocks having more than 60% of the area under uplands/rain-
fed. 
 
Natural Farming Clusters. 
 
Watershed areas taken up under WDC project in last 20 years shall be given 
preference.  
 
Gram Panchayat/Blocks which are the focus are as of NRLM. 
 Aspirational blocks selected by NITI Aayog. 
 Villages included under Pradhan  Mantri  Janjatiya Unnat Gram Abhiyan 
(PMJUGA).   
 Districts and Blocks selected under NFSM Pulse/Oilseeds/Millets. 
 
vi. 
Millets perform exceptionally well in rainfed areas due to its hardiness and capacity to 
withstand climatic aberration. Cultivation of millets shall be preferred in RAD thus 
contributing to Government's strategy to promote millets. Cluster approach in a village 
or an area of not less than 20 ha. to be adopted to utilize the potential of available/created 
common resources. At least 25% area of the cluster shall be taken up for Millets 
cultivation. 
vii. 
States/UTs should facilitate the beneficiary of RAD scheme to avail Soil Health Card 
and Kisan Credit Card while implementing RAD. 
viii. 
RAD system increases carbon storage potential due to multiple plant species and 
enhances green coverage in agricultural lands. Carbon sequestration potential in RAD 

112 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
system is generally greater than that of single crop based system. RAD thus contributes 
to increasing the scope for emerging carbon market. 
ix. 
Involving knowledge institutions and professionals in developing climate change 
adaptation and mitigation strategies for specific agro climatic situations and promoting 
them through appropriate farming systems. Recommendations of ICAR’s Contingency 
Plans and technologies developed under NICRA project on climate resilient farming 
shall also be integrated in the project plan. 
x. 
Programmatic interventions as per land capability and conducive to climatic parameters 
for ensuring integrated development through dissemination and adoption of rainfed 
technologies with greater reach in disadvantaged areas & location specific planning by 
way of coordination, convergence and leveraging investments from other 
Schemes/Missions. A consortium approach would be evolved with various stakeholders 
including knowledge partners like State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) institutes, 
other professional/academic organizations like DST, DBT etc. to provide single window 
service/knowledge provider system for the benefit of farming community. 
xi. 
State Government may involve additional field level Community Resource Persons 
(CRPs) as per the requirement in implementing the programme. Efforts should be made 
to make optimum utilization of field cadre of SRLM, NF programme, BTM/ATM under 
ATMA. State Govt. may select field level NGOs/Young Professionals to supports 
programmes implemented through Women SHGs/ FPOs. 
xii. 
All land based interventions should be Geo Tagged/Geo Fenced. Krishi Mapper/Mobile 
App developed by DA&FW shall be used for Geo Tagging/Geo Fencing of farmers’ 
field. The data captured by the App will automatically link with the program MIS portal 
of the State/Central through API. 
xiii. 
Strong technical monitoring and feedback systems on climate change mitigation and 
adaptation issues for regular updates on technical feasibility of various components and 
their effectiveness in bringing about the climate resilience should be ensured. The 
experts of central institutes and state agricultural universities would be part of such 
technical monitoring/feedback. The capacity building of the implementing agencies 
would be steered by MANAGE. 
 
 
 
 

113 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
B.6.3 Interventions: 
 
RAD aims at promoting Integrated Farming System (IFS) with emphasis on multi-cropping, 
rotational cropping, inter-cropping, mixed-cropping practices with allied activities like 
horticulture, livestock, fishery, plantation, apiculture, etc. to enable farmers not only in 
maximizing the farm returns for sustaining livelihood, but also to mitigate the impacts of 
drought, flood or other extreme weather events which are occurring frequently due to climate 
change; 
Depending on the type and extent of natural resources/assets/commodities already developed 
or supported, location-specific crops, fruits, feed & fodder, livestock, fisheries, apiculture, 
mushroom, medicinal & aromatic plantation and related income generating activities would be 
supported. Activities like construction of ponds, land treatment, wells, supply of pumps, micro 
irrigation/other water saving devices, seed and sapling support etc. would be 
converged/supplemented to promote value addition through a sustainable farming system; 
 
i. 
Adoption of a cluster approach in a village or an area of not less than 20. Ha. (contiguous 
or non- contiguous in difficult terrain with close proximity, in a village/adjoining 
villages and at least 25% area to be covered for Millets cultivation) may be preferred for 
injecting investments to utilize the potential of available/created common resources; 
ii. 
Support will be given to those who wish to add other compatible farming component(s) 
to their existing crops/ system. It should have the potential to introduce/merge at least 
one or more major components/activities apart from cropping system of the integrated 
farming systems to qualify for the support. Support for only cropping system will not 
be allowed under this component unless it is diversified from the regular practice to a 
farming system suitable to that particular ecological conditions through effective on 
farm rain water management and soil health care. Farmers would have the option to 
choose one or the other combination of farming systems suitable to the specific eco-
system supported through local KVKs, SAUs, ICAR institutes, ICRISAT, ATMA etc., 
for maximizing agricultural productivity from the existing natural resource assets; 
iii. 
Support to each farming family under RAD component will be restricted to financial 
assistance of Rs.30,000/-.The amount of assistance shall be uniform for all farmers 
irrespective of the size of their land holding. The details of interventions’ supported 
under RAD and Format for preparation of AAP are given at Appendix –I and 
Appendix –II respectively. 

114 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
iv. 
State Government shall involve additional field level Community Resource Persons in 
the implementation of the program. Monitoring and capacity building of the 
beneficiaries through Community Resource Persons (CRPs) under SRLM, Self Help 
Groups, Champion Farmers under NF program etc. shall be taken up. Provision of 
Rs.10,000/- per cluster has been made for such field level support. 
v. 
Farmland development would be taken up through location specific interventions like 
resource conservation, rainwater harvesting, land development in watershed areas, last 
mile connectivity etc. Farmers’ Producer Companies/Organizations, Registered 
Farmers’ Societies, Farmers’ Cooperatives would also be eligible for developing a 
cluster. 
vi. 
Converging the upgraded utilities developed through watershed development programs 
(WDC- PMKSY)/ NREGA in terms of water harvesting and micro water storages 
through effective application and distribution systems like improved conveyance, field 
channels, pressurized irrigation, water lifting devices etc. to enhance the potential of 
farming systems. 
vii. 
Suitable linkage for agro-processing and Marketing may be established for the cluster. 
Possibilities of building post-harvest and market linkage under PPP model may be 
explored. 
 
 
B.6.4 Convergence: 
 
Convergence of relevant developmental programs in project areas is important for optimal 
utilization of resources by establishing an integrated and coordinated system involving different 
sectors and institutions. The upgraded utilities developed through watershed development 
programs (WDC- PMKSY)/MGNREGA/ other schemes of Ministry of Rural Development in 
terms of soil and water conservation and micro water storages can be made use to enhance the 
potential of farming systems. Areas/Commodities being developed under National Food and 
Nutrition Security Mission (NFNSM), National Mission on Edible Oil-Oilseeds (NMEO-OS), 
Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH), National Mission on Natural 
Farming, Sub Mission on Agricultural Extension (SMAE) etc. can be supplemented with other 
interventions under RKVY to make it an Integrated Farming System facilitating additional 
livelihood opportunities to farmers. Interventions on Agriculture Extension shall be 
appropriately made use for capacity building, awareness generation, information support, farm 
mechanization, availability of seeds/planting materials etc. 

115 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
 
I. Support to RAD through MNREGA: 
 
Under MNREGA, mandatory expenditure of at least 60% on the works to be taken up is for 
agriculture and allied activities. The scheme provides for various plantation models such as 
block plantation, canal side plantation, sericulture, horticulture plantation, boundary plantation, 
farm forestry, wasteland plantation, shelter belt trees plantation, coastline plantation, 
development of silvipasture grassland etc. There are many line Departments such as the Forest 
Department, Agriculture Department, Horticulture Department, Soil Conservation Department, 
Tribal Development, Watershed Department etc. that are working as implementing agency 
under MNREGS in the States. Every asset/land based intervention is geo-tagged in three stages, 
stage 1- before, Stage 2- during and Stage 3 -after completion of work under MNREGA and 
these assets would be utilized under RAD for promoting sustainable farming systems. 
 
Since MNREGA provides sufficient opportunities for agriculture and allied activities, 
States/UTs must be ensured convergence of RAD with MNREGA to augment the impact of the 
scheme. Further, as MNREGA has robust monitoring system, monitoring of works at the micro 
level shall be carried out by Panchayat institutions through existing mechanism of MNREGA. 
 
II. Support to RAD through PMKSY-WDC: 
i. 
The objectives of Watershed Development Program includes; a) Securing production 
and farmers’ income against climate variability and its risks of drought spells through 
diversification of crop systems & animal husbandry, and varied livelihood portfolios; 
efficient water harvesting and retention of rainwater in soil profile; and entitling all 
project members to ground and surface water resources for life saving irrigation on 
equitable basis. b) Improving intensity and productivity of various crops, livestock, 
fisheries and biomass production systems through optimal, integrated, sustainable and 
efficient use of natural resources in project areas. c) Recognizing the stake of non- land 
holding project members, and promoting alternate livelihood opportunities. d) Building 
an ecosystem of enterprises for facilitating efficient scales of operations, access to credit, 
and market linkages; knowledge sharing; and resource convergence led by vibrant 
member managed farmers’ institutions. 
ii. 
Convergence of RAD with PMKSY-WDC (Department of Land Resource) shall 
compliment the much needed resources for promoting Integrated Farming System. 

116 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Watershed Development Projects of MoRD are to improve productive potential of 
rainfed / degraded land through integrated watershed management. It strengthens 
community based local institutions for promotion of livelihoods. At macro - level, the 
vision of WDC-PMKSY projects is to accelerate the economic growth rate of agriculture 
in the less endowed rainfed areas of the country. Moreover, this is to be achieved by 
adopting harmony with ecological principles of development for ensuring sustained 
transformation of economy and ecology. The guiding principles are better Economy, 
Ecology and Equity in the rainfed regions of the country. At watershed level, the 
development plan is guided by the need to achieve higher incomes for farmers, expanded 
livelihood options for landless, equity in distribution of benefits, community ownership 
and management, and ecologically sustainable action plan. 
iii. 
Similarly, RAD aims at promoting location specific improved agronomic practices 
through soil health management, enhanced water use efficiency, crop diversification, 
progressive adoption of crop- livestock farming systems and integrated approaches like 
crop-sericulture, agro-forestry, fish farming, etc. Therefore, States/UTs must ensure 
close convergence of Watershed Developments Programs with RAD. Priority should be 
given to the are as covered under Watershed projects for RAD implementation. 
 
III. Support to RAD through National Food and Nutrition Security Mission (NFNSM): 
NFNSM supports increase in production of food crops including PMO through production and 
productivity enhancement in a sustainable manner in the identified Districts of the country, 
restoring soil fertility and productivity at the individual farm level and enhancing farm level 
economy (i.e. farm profits) and post-harvest value addition at farm gate for better price 
realization to farmers through efficient market linkage. NFNSM promotes intensive package of 
practices (crop production & protection technologies) on compact blocks in cluster approach. 
This ensures inclusion of all the farmers in the block irrespective of their size of holding or the 
social status of the farmers. Accordingly, latest crop production & protection technologies 
including quality seeds, nutrients, plant protection measures, resource conservation 
technologies, exposure visit of farmers are promoted incompact blocks in cluster approach. New 
extension models involving non-governmental organizations are also adopted for reaching out 
to the farmers in remote and in accessible areas. RAD should be closely supported under 
NFNSM through various interventions including extension activities for promotion of PMO 
based farming systems. 

117 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
IV. Support to RAD through National Mission on Natural Farming: 
i. 
Natural Farming if done effectively enhances restoration of soil fertility and 
environmental health, and mitigating and/or reducing greenhouse gas emissions thus 
aiding to move towards chemical free agriculture. Natural Farming builds on natural or 
ecological processes that exist in or around farms. Under this, soil is always supposed to 
be covered with organic mulch, which creates humus and encourages the growth of 
friendly microorganisms. Farm made bio-cultures named ‘Jeevamrit, Beejamrit etc.’ are 
added to the soil instead of any fertilizers to improve microflora of soil. 
ii. 
Extension program is an important component of National Mission on Natural Farming. 
Under the Mission, natural farming practitioners shall be identified in consultation with 
local Gram Panchayat who are successful natural farmer with their entire land holding 
under natural farming since last 2-3 years. Such practicing natural farmers are identified 
as “Champion Farmers”. Selected champion farmer shall have adequatel and for 
demonstration of natural farming practices, have necessary facility for monthly trainings 
on field (like preparation of Bijamrit, Jivamrit etc) and have organizational capacity and 
good communication skills. In addition, one rural youth belonging to a family of natural 
farmer (other than Champion farmer) is identified as “Community Resource Person 
(CRP) in consultation with Grampanchayat. Champion Farmer (CF) and Community 
Resource Persons(CRPs) lead the natural farming cluster right from Farmer Field School 
to registration of farmers, regular meetings, motivating the farmers to join natural 
farming movement and support participating farmers in implementation of best natural 
farming practices, problem solutions, farm management, certification, collective 
marketing of their produce etc. 
iii. 
RAD also emphasizes on the principles of natural farming. This requires adequate 
awareness and capacity building efforts for farmers. RAD shall be supported by Natural 
Farming programs especially on the capacity building of the farming community through 
Champion Farmers. Priority should be given to areas taken under Natural Farming while 
identifying clusters for RAD program in order to achieve close convergence. 
V. Support to RAD through Sub-Mission on Agriculture Extension (SMAE): 
The Scheme ATMA (Agriculture Technology Management Agency) supports State Extension 
Programmes for bringing Extension Reforms across the country and it has now been included 
as a Centrally Sponsored component of the Sub-Mission on Agriculture Extension (SMAE). It 

118 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
is now under implementation in 696 districts of 28 States & 5 UTs of the country. Innovative 
and restructured institutional arrangements have been made for technology dissemination 
amongst the farmers on a pilot tested Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) 
model at district level. Under the Scheme, fund is provided to States with an objective to support 
State Governments efforts of revitalization of their extension system and making available the 
latest agricultural technologies and good agricultural practices to farmers in different thematic 
areas to increase agricultural production through various extension activities. As extension 
initiatives are the key to success of RAD program, states must ensure that all beneficiaries under 
RAD shall be covered under SMAE programs. 
 
B.6.5 Rainfed Area Development – NRAA as Knowledge Partner 
 
National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA), Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
servesasa knowledge and technology platform for promoting the growth of agriculture and 
welfare of farmers in rainfed regions of the country. In this capacity, NRAA is actively engaged 
with various Ministries and Departments at the union level, and with the State Governments as 
well. The focus of such engagements is always promotion of rainfed agriculture by enabling 
knowledge-based interventions and efficient coordination with various agencies, and 
convergence of different services. The Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(DA&FW) amongst a bouquet of its several prorammes targeting growth of the country’s 
agricultural sector including the rainfed area, has specifically designed ‘Rainfed Area 
Development’ (RAD) to enhance greater resilience to the production systems, and 
promoteegalitari an agricultural growth. NRAA with its specific mandate dedicated to the 
accelerated growth of the country’s rainfed agriculture can be a useful partner in this regard. 
In this context, National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) is notified asa ‘Knowledge and 
Partner’ to the DA&FW in carrying out its flagship programme. Some of the specific mandates 
of NRAA vis-a-vis this partnership are as follows: 
(i) 
Provide technology and knowledge support including identification of project clusters 
and priority areas.  
(ii) Formulate guidelines and operational manuals for promoting integrated farming and 
livelihood systems (IFLS) 
(iii) Serveasa supervising agency and towards this, undertake field visits and coordinate with 
state and field implementation agencies 
(iv) Design and help in adopting a system of‘ Monitoring and Information System(MIS) 

119 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
(v) 
Undertake capacity building, training and skill development activities for the states and 
its implementing agencies 
(vi)  Anchor the process of convergence with IWMP and such other initiatives (projects, 
programmes, schemes etc.) that will enhance inter-initiative convergence and yield 
synergistic outcome  
(vii) Provide any other support as is felt necessary from time to time on issues, that emerge as 
a result of consultation between concerned Division(s) of the DA&FW and NRAA 
 
B.6.6 Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
Geo- Tagging of land based interventions: A robust Monitoring and Evaluation mechanism 
using modern technology shall be emphasized upon. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) 
mechanism to keep a tab on project areas/ physical assets created, name of beneficiaries, 
assistance provided etc. under RAD would be developed. Monitoring of works shall be carried 
out through existing mechanism of MNREGA/schemes of Ministry of Rural Developmental so. 
All and based interventions shall be Geo- tagged through Apps based monitoring system. Krishi 
Mapper/Mobile App developed by DA&FW shall be used for Geo Tagging/Geo Fencing of 
farmers’ field. The data captured by the App will automatically link with the State/Central MIS 
portal through API. Geo-tagged photograph of area covered under RAD scheme shall be made 
available in the MIS Portal. 
Project based studies and assessment for Soil carbon sequestration, soil organic matter, 
improvement in livelihood, productivity enhancement of crop and cropping systems etc. shall 
also be undertaken. MIS and periodical assessment using GIS technologies would be adopted 
for ensuring effective monitoring of the programme. States will upload approved AAP, Physical 
and financial progress under the Scheme should also be updated every month and uploaded in 
the portal as per Performa given at Annexure-XLVI. The information on physical and financial 
achievements under TSP & SCSP and Women components has to be furnished periodically as 
Performa given at Annexure-XLVI-A. 
 
 
 
B.6.7 Expected Outcome 
 
RAD program shall increase the area covered under Integrated Farming System resulting in 
augmenting farmers income. It is expected to transform rain-fed agriculture areas which are 

120 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
more sensitive areas to climatic aberrations into more climate resilient production system 
through suitable adaptation and mitigation measures. Integrating farming systems with 
horticulture, livestock, bee rearing and fisheries shall provide income security to farmers in time 
of abnormal climatic condition. Millets being climate friendly crops, promoting their cultivation 
through RAD program shall result in increase in cultivation area and production of millets. 
 
 
 

121 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
B.7 
AGROFORESTRY 
 
i. 
Agroforestry is known to have the potential to mitigate the climate change effects 
through microclimate moderation, conservation of natural resources and creation of an 
additional source of livelihood and income opportunities. In order to make agriculture 
less vulnerable to climatic aberrations, the Government of India formulated the National 
Agroforestry Policy in 2014.The policy recommends setting up a Mission or Board with 
an initial corpus of Rs4000-5000 crore annually to address the development of 
agroforestry sector in an organized manner. As a follow-up to the policy, the Sub-
Mission on agroforestry (SMAF) under National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture 
(NMSA) was launched in 2016-17 to encourage and expand tree plantation on farmland, 
with the motto of “Har Med Par Ped”, along with crops/cropping system. 
ii. 
There have been many initiatives to upscale agro forestry in farm lands, degraded, barren 
and wastelands. The adoption of agroforestry by farming community is on an upward 
trend after the coming of the National Agroforestry Policy in 2014.There is ample 
evidence to show that agroforestry enhances productivity, soil fertility improvement, 
soil conservation, nutrient cycling, micro climate improvement etc. Over70% of 
nurseries in the country are privately owned. Approximately only10% of seedlings 
supplied for agroforestry are of Quality Planting Material. Quality Planting Material 
(QPM) like seeds, seedlings, clones, hybrids, improved varieties, etc. of healthy, 
resilient and adaptable nursery stock must be made available to farmers. QPM can be 
considered as part of a value chain that begins with the source of tree seed and ends at 
the market for the tree product or environmental service, or even at the consumer level. 
The quality of the initial input, which is the tree seed source determines the productivity 
and quality of the productor service at the end of the chain. 
iii. 
Agroforestry has varieties of produce from timber to non-timber products. 
Strengthening farmer access to markets for tree products is important hence, providing 
support price and buy-back guarantee for farm-grown trees and other agroforestry 
products can be an important step to promote agro forestry for the farmers. Marketing 
infrastructure similar to what is available for agricultural commodities including market 
information can be taken up in agroforestry with more private sector participation. 
iv. 
Agroforestry has the potential to contribute to the government's strategy to promote 
millets. Traditionally millets are grown along with trees in tropical as well as sub-
tropical regions of the country. In agroforestry systems, millets perform exceptionally 

122 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
well due to their hardiness and capacity to with stand prolonged periods of drought, and 
high temperatures and also having higher efficiency in absorbing and utilizing carbon 
dioxide. 
v. 
Agroforestry can support the action plan for Mission LiFE (Lifestyle for Environment) 
which makes environmental protection and conservation as a participative process. 
Agroforestry promotes agro ecology and is one of the potential areas for Carbon Credits 
as well as Green Credit Program (GCP). Agro forestry system is known to have high 
carbon sequestration potential thereby increasing the soilor ganic carbon(SOC)in 
farmer’s field. 
Reduction of diversity in agricultural landscapes across India severely reduces the 
resilience to climate and pest shocks, while also missing out on potential economic and 
ecological opportunities. Increase in the green cover through agroforestry will mitigate 
pollution, and climate change impacts and contribute to biodiversity conservation in the 
agricultural ecosystem. 
vi. 
Agroforestry has importance as a carbon sequestration strategy because of the carbon 
storage potential in its multiple plant species considering its applicability in agricultural 
lands and reforestation. Evidence is now emerging that agroforestry systems are 
promising land use systems to increase and conserve above ground and soil carbon 
stock. The carbon sequestration potential of an agroforestry system is generally greater 
than that of an annual cropped-based system. Agroforestry thus contributes to the 
resilience of agriculture by adaptation and mitigation of climate change effects and 
provides scope for emerging carbon market. 
vii. 
Agroforestry supports agro-ecology and reduces vulnerability to climate and 
environmental change. Activities under the NMSA strategy and technologies associated 
with Climate Resilient Agriculture may be promoted through the scheme. 
viii. 
Institutional support from the Indian Council of Forest Research & Education (ICFRE), 
ICAR-Central Agroforestry Research Institute (CAFRI), Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (CSIR),ICRAF, etc. which have the technical knowledge and 
experience on agroforestry will for man integral part of the intervention. 
 
 
B.7.2 Strategy: Quality Planting Material (QPM) and Certification: 
 
i. 
The scheme shall promote the setting up of new small, medium and hi-tech nurseries for 
producing Quality Planting Materials (QPM) like seeds, seedlings, clones, and improved 

123 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
varieties to meet the requirement of farmers. Various agroforestry practices/models 
suitable to different agro ecological regions and land use conditions shall be promoted 
that will support adaptation and mitigation efforts in accordance with NMS A 
guidelines. 
ii. 
ICAR-CAFRI as Nodal Agency for QPM: 
a) ICAR-Central Agroforestry Research Institute(CAFRI) shall be the nodal agency for 
providing technical support, capacity building, setting up of nurseries, production, and 
certification of QPM etc. CAFRI shall extend support through its All India Coordinated 
Research Project (AICRP) centers on agroforestry situated at various locations around 
the country. ICAR-CAFRI shall coordinate activities with other agencies/ institutes like 
ICFRE, CIFOR-ICRAF, FAO-India, SAUs, CAUs, Private Partners, etc. while facilitating 
the implementation of the scheme. 
b) All nurseries setup under the scheme shall comply with the registration and accreditation 
requirements as laid down by CAFRI. The States shall also make efforts for 
accreditation of other existing Forest Department/Private/Cooperative nurseries in the 
State that produce planting material for Agro forestry.  
c) Certification of QPM from accredited nurseries shall be done as per guidelines laid down 
by CAFRI in association with empaneled agencies/experts. 
d) CAFRI shall provide the standard sand modalities for Registration, Certification and 
Accreditation of Nurseries as well as Certification of QPM from such 
Registered/Accredited nurseries. 
e) Capacity building in agroforestry shall be through ICAR-CAFRI and it may be notified 
as the Central HRD Institution that shall train Master Trainers for different states. 
iii. 
The State Nodal Department/Agency: For the implementation of the scheme State Nodal 
Department/Agency shall be identified for each State/UTs. 
iv. 
The Nodal Department/Agency shall ensure the availability of QPM by producing on 
its own or through the collaborative arrangement with individuals/institutions suchas 
SAUs, KVKs, FPOs, SHGs, NGOs, Entrepreneurs/Startups, Forest/Agriculture 
institutes, farmers/cooperative societies etc. 
v. 
Capacity building/training for officials/workers, scientists and farmers, extension 
activities including demonstration of Nursery Techniques for the raising of QPM, 
seminars/workshops/conferences/fairs& exhibitions and exposure visits of stake holders 
shall be emphasized upon. 
vi. 
Physical verification of the Nurseries and seed lings raised under the scheme shall be 

124 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
done by the State Nodal Department/Agency based on the technical guidelines from 
CAFRI. Third party verification may also carried out to ensure quality of nurseries/seed 
lings. Verification certificate shall be obtained by the individual/institution that raised 
the nursery. 
vii. 
Nursery Accreditation will ensure the availability of high quality planting material   for   
trees   and   other   woody   perennials    for    agroforestry purposes. Accordingly, each 
State Nodal Departments should ensure that publicity of     these      certified     seedlings      
should     be       done      to      all      other Govt Departments/Municipalities to go for 
sourcing of certified seedlings produced from these Accredited Nurseries. 
viii. 
PMUs constituted at the State levels will have the responsibility to ensure collaboration 
among various line departments in the Centre/State/District to achieve the targets. A 
national level PMU shall be operational at DAC&FW for overall implementation and 
monitoring of the scheme. 
ix. 
Technical Support Groups (TSG) with experts from ICAR-Central Agro forestry 
Research Institute (CAFRI), Indian Council of Forest Research & Education (ICFRE), 
ICRAF and other organizations/individuals shall be constituted at National level. 
x. 
ICAR-CAFRI will act as Nodal Agency for repository of agroforestry related works 
with a preamble note to states for providing all related information to CAFRI.CAFRI 
may undertake project-based activities including transfer of agroforestry technology in 
various agro climatic zones, business incubation and training to stake holders. 
 
 
B.7.3 Seed source: 
 
ii. 
Supply of Quality Planting Material (QPM) which essentially is healthy, resilient and 
adaptable nursery stock raised through seed or vegetative propagation is the key for 
promoting agroforestry. The scheme envisages a sustainable supply of Quality Planting 
Material (QPM) of healthy, resilient nursery stock raised in hi-tech centralized nurseries 
as well as small-scale decentralized model nurseries. QPM may be of multipurpose tree 
species, species having timber value, medicinal plants etc. Also, various agroforestry 
practices/models suitable to different agro-ecological regions and land use conditions 
shall be promoted. 
iii. 
The 
Nodal 
Department/Agency 
shall 
coordinate 
with 
the 
Forest 
Department/CAFRI/ICFRE/SAUs/private growers for germplasm/seed source required 
for the production of QPM. In many States, the State Forest Department through their 

125 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
research programs are taking up various tree improvement initiatives which also include 
Agro forestry species. The scheme should leverage coordination with the State Forest 
Department for sourcing quality seeds/germplasm. The need to establish a national-level 
coordinating centre for streamlining the supply, while ensuring the quality of the seeds 
shall be explored. 
 
B.7.4 Distribution of Quality Planting Material (QPM): 
 
QMP raised under the scheme shall be made available for farmers/SHGs free of cost or as 
decided by the respective States/UTs. The plantation and maintenance in subsequent years shall 
be done by beneficiaries. However, nodal departments/ agencies shall make efforts to meet out 
the plantation and maintenance cost through convergence with MNREGA/other schemes of 
Department of Rural Development/Forests/Agriculture/Horticulture. 
 
B.7.5 Geo-Tagging of land-based interventions: 
 
a. Digital information and support system to farmers shall be promoted (ICAR-Central 
Agroforestry Research Institute (CAFRI) has developed a bilingual mobile app 'Farm 
Tree' for effective out reach to its stake holders and farmers. With the help of this farm 
tree app, farmers can know about the suitable tree species, spacing, cultivation practices, 
etc. Similarly, International Centre for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF) with the 
Department of Agriculture, Odisha has developed App-Agroforestry App Odisha (India) 
for farmers 'support on agroforestry. Both the ICAR-CAFRI and ICRAF will also work 
towards establishing data base for knowledge support in agroforestry. 
b. All and based intervention should be Geo Tagged/Geo Fenced. Krishi Mapper/Mobile 
App developed by DA&FW shall be used for Geo Tagging/Geo Fencing of farmers’ field.   
The data captured by the App will be automatically linked with the State/Central MIS 
portal through API. 
c. National Web portal shall be developed where such information on registered nurseries, 
plantations, availability of seedlings, price, seed source, genetic makeup etc. Shall be 
made available. All scheme related information including progress and achievements 
should be captured by State Management Information System (MIS) which the States may 
also develop and this may be integrated with the National portal or information should be 
made accessible through API to ensure seamless flow of information. 
d. M&E platforms using modern geo-spatial technology/satellite imagery in collaboration 

126 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
with MNCFC/ICAR-CAFRI shall be taken up. 
 
B.7.6 Support of Agro forestry through MNREGA 
i. 
Agroforestry envisages close convergence with MNREGA (Department of Rural 
Development). Under MNREGA mandatory expenditure of at least 60% on the works 
to be taken up is for agriculture and allied activities. The scheme provides for various 
plantation models such as block plantation, canal side plantation, sericulture, 
horticulture plantation, boundary plantation, farm forestry, wastel and plantation, 
shelterbelt trees plantation, coastline plantation, development of silvipasture grass land 
etc. Further, raising of nursery is a permissible activity under the scheme. Plantation 
works are permissible in the community as well as in individual beneficiary land. There 
are many line Departments such as the Forest Department, Agriculture Department, 
Horticulture Department, Soil Conservation Department, Tribal Development, 
Watershed Department etc. that are working as implementing agency under MNREGS 
in the States. Every asset/land-based intervention is geo-tagged in three stages, stage 1- 
before, Stage 2- during and Stage 3 -after completion of work under MNREGA. 
ii. 
During the implementation of agroforestry scheme, an incentivized system will promote 
the local communities/SHGs/farmers to adopt agroforestry/restore waste land/degradedl 
and by plantation (agro-ecological sustainable models). Agroforestry scheme made 
provision of QPM distribution to farmers. Since MNREGA provides sufficient 
opportunities for agroforestry related works, States/UTs must ensure convergence of the 
scheme with MNREGA to meet the cost of plantation including maintenance. 
iii. 
Works such as nurseries, plantations, survival of seedling in the field etc. shall be closely 
monitored. As MNREGA has robust monitoring system, monitoring of works such as 
plantation and maintenance at the micro level shall be carried out by State PMUs with 
support of Panchayat institutions through existing mechanism of MNREGA. 
 
B.7.7 
Scheme Interventions: 
 
i. 
Establishment of nurseries for Quality Planting Material (QPM): Expanding the 
scope of business opportunities as startups in agroforestry, the small nurseries, big 
nurseries, Hi-Tech nurseries and Tissue Culture facilities shall be supported under the 
scheme as given at Annexure-I. Such nurseries and QPM labs shall adopt standards/ 
protocols developed by ICAR-CAFRI/ICRAF. Also, nurseries shall be registered and 
accredited as per the protocol developed by ICAR-CAFRI with suitable third-party 

127 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
certification procedure. 
ii. 
Skill development and awareness campaign: Activities like training of farmers/field 
workers to ensure raising quality planting material, skill development to youth for 
business opportunities in agroforestry, awareness campaign, publications, information 
sharing, exposure visits, seminars/workshops at national/ international levels etc. would 
be supported under the scheme. States can utilize upto5% of the allocated funds for 
capacity building and training activities. The training activities, materials and report 
should be made publicly available for the benefit of all stakeholders. 
iii. 
Research and Development: Specific projects for demonstration for extension 
purposes 
on 
specific 
innovative 
agro 
forestry 
models 
by 
ICAR-
CAFRI/SAUs/CAUs/CSIR/ICFRE institutes/State Government/ other National & 
International level organizations/ Private Partners shall be supported. Also project based 
studies on carbon sequestration, soil health improvement, etc will be supported under 
the scheme. Following themes/topics shall be supported for Research & Development: 
 
a. 
 Works related to accreditation of Agroforestry nurseries and certification of 
seedlings. 
b. 
Agroforestry as system approach. 
c. 
Nexus of Biodiversity, Soil and Water conservation. 
d. 
Climate Resilient Agroforestry Species and Practices. 
e. 
Economic viability and market linkages. 
f. 
Quantification of Community Participation and Social dynamics. 
g. 
Indigenization of digital augmentation and tools. 
 
iv. 
Monitoring & Evaluation and Other specialized technical works: For M&E, use of 
geo-spatial technology/satellite imageries, AI & ML etc. shall be taken up with ICAR-
CAFRI/ICFRE/MNCFC institutes. 
v. 
Local Initiative: States can utilize upto2% of the allocated funds for promoting 
innovations as per local needs/transportation of seedlings/local level monitoring 
mechanism through SHGs etc. 
Eligible components and pattern of assistance for interventions is given in the Table below. 
 
 
 

128 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
B.7.8 
Convergence architecture with other Central Government schemes 
 
i. 
An incentivized system will promote the local communities/SHGs/farmers to adopt 
agroforestry/restore waste land/degradedl and by plantation. Under the agroforestry 
scheme, cost of plantation including maintenance of QPM distributed shall be met 
through convergence with WDC-PMKSY/MNREGA/other schemes of Department of 
Rural Development. 
ii. 
Need based interventions and activities of tree plantation, Industry development & 
market linking to agriculture and allied sectors will be automatically converged/dovetail 
for integrated and holistic development of project are a under Central & State 
Government programmes. Convergence with other schemes of DA & FW viz. RAD, 
Integrated Farming System, Per Drop More Crop (micro irrigation enhances growth and 
yields), Agri-infrastructure Fund, formation of 10,000 FPOs and other organizations is 
envisaged for enhanced returns. Convergence with programmes like National Clean 
Ganga Mission, National Medicinal Plant Board, M/o AYUSH, Central Silk Board, 
Indian Institute of Petroleum, etc. may also be explored. 
 
B.7.9 Monitoring &Evaluation: 
i. 
Monitoring & Evaluation shall for man integral part of the scheme. Sustainable supply 
of QPM, survival of seedling in the field, enhanced agroforestry produce, increase in 
agroforestry area of the country etc. shall be closely monitored. Monitoring of plantation 
and maintenance works shall be carried out through existing mechanism of 
MNREGA/schemes of Ministry of Rural Development. Also, SHGs (under 
NRLM)/village level institutions shall be closely involved in monitoring the 
implementation of the scheme. 
ii. 
All land-based interventions shall be Geo-tagged through Apps based monitoring 
system. Project based studies and assessment for Soil carbon sequestration, soil organic 
matter, improvement in livelihood, productivity enhancement of crop and cropping 
systems etc. shall also be under taken. MIS and periodical assessment using GIS 
technologies would be adopted for ensuring effective monitoring of the programme. 
M&E initiatives using geo-spatial technology shall be taken up with Mahalanobis 
National Crop Forecast Centre (MNCFC)/ICAR under the program. 
 

129 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
B.7.10 Expected Outcome: 
i. 
Sustainable availability of Quality Planting Material for agroforestry. 
ii. 
Increase in tree cover on farm lands, community land, government land, leading to 
increased production of timber and non-timber produce out of agroforestry to meet the 
increasing demand of raw materials for wood-based industries. 
iii. 
Reduction in pressure and dependence on forests and forest produce. Reduction in 
import of timber and other tree products. 
iv. 
Additional Income to farmers even under adverse climatic conditions & livelihood 
improvement. 
v. 
Enhanced carbon sequestration in farm lands as well as ecosystem services. 
 
 
 
 
 

130 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
B.8 
CDP 
Crop Diversification refers to a shift from the regional dominance of one crop to regional production 
of a number of crops, to meet ever increasing demand of cereals, pulses, vegetables, fruits, 
oilseeds, fibres, fodder, grasses etc. It aims to improve soil health and to maintain dynamic 
equilibrium of the agro-ecosystem. It  is intended to promote technological innovations for 
sustainable agriculture and enable farmers to choose crop alternatives for increased productivity 
and income. 
The concerns relating to diversification of rice-wheat cropping systems area in the country came 
to fore when yield levels of these two most important food crops experienced stagnancy and 
net profit accruals showed diminishing trend. The problem got further aggravated due to 
depletion of water table in North-West plains zone comprising Punjab, Haryana and West Uttar 
Pradesh. Thus, dwindling ground water resource in these States due to excessive withdrawal of 
water for irrigation led to impurities in the water-a cause of attendant crop health effects.  
B.8.1 Coverage 
The programme is to be implemented in 3 states namely Punjab, Haryana and Western Uttar 
Pradesh. The notified over-exploited and critical blocks based on recommendation of Central 
Ground Water Board of major paddy growing districts of each state would be identified for 
implementation of Crop Diversification programme. At least 5% of area under paddy in 
identified blocks would be diverted towards alternate crops. 
Sl. 
States 
Rice area 
% share of 
Targeted area of 
 
 
(`000' ha) 
respective 
paddy for diversion 
 
 
(QE:2011-12) 
state rice area  
to 
total 
all  
states 
three  
rice area 
('000' ha) 
1 
Punjab 
2759.2 
50.25 
140.00 
2 
Haryana 
1194.0 
21.75 
60.00 
3 
West 
Uttar
Pradesh 
1537.2 
28.00 
80.00 
 
Total 
5490.4 100 
280.00 
 
 
 

131 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
B.8.2 Crops and activity covered 
In order to divert area to other alternate crops, it is proposed to motivate the farmers for cultivation 
of maize, kharif pulses ( arhar, mungbean, urdbean, cluster bean ), oilseeds (soybean, til), poplar 
based agro-forestry system ( cultivation of rabi and kharif inter-crops), it is also proposed to 
provide the assistance to the farmers for land development, farm mechanization, establishment 
of agro-based food processing units for value addition and marketing support to generate 
additional income and restore soil fertility. 
 
B.8.3 Allocation of funds 
In order to implement the proposed programme on Crop Diversification in Original Green 
Revolution States to divert 5% area of Paddy to other alternate crops fitting in the prevalent 
wheat-paddy cropping system.  
B.8.4 Institutional Architecture 
I. National Level 
In order to implement & monitor the programme of "Crop Diversification in Original Green 
Revolution States", a Central Steering Committee (CSC) would be constituted under the 
chairmanship of Secretary (A &C). The composition of CSC is as under:- 
 
1 Secretary (A&C), Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, 
Ministry of Agriculture, Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi-110 001. 
Chairman 
2 
Additional Secretary (Seeds & RKVY), Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture, Krishi 
Bhavan, New Delhi-110001 
Member 
3 Agriculture Commissioner, Department of Agriculture & 
Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture, Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi-
110 001. 
Member 
4 DDG (NRM), ICAR, Anusandhan Bhavan, New Pusa, New 
Delhi-110012 
Member 
5 Joint Secretary (Crops), Department of Agriculture & 
Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture, Krishi Bhavan, New 
Delhi-110 001. 
Member-  
Secretary 
 
CSC will meet the quarterly basis and review & monitor the implementation of the scheme. CSC 
will also be responsible for addition, deletion & modification of the ongoing activity of the 
programme. 
 

132 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
II. State Level 
A state level committee (SLC) would be constituted under the chairmanship of Secretary, 
Agriculture of the state with the following constituents 
1. 
 
Secretary , Agriculture 
Chairman 
2. 
 
Director, Agriculture 
Member secretary 
3. 
 
Representative of Forest Department 
Member 
4. 
 
Director Research of State Agriculture 
University 
Member 
5. 
 
Representative from DAC 
Member 
 
The SLC of "Crop Diversification in Original Green Revolution States" will be fully 
responsible for approval of district specific programme, implementation and monitoring of 
programme in the state. Each state will create a cell at state level to look after day to day work 
for implementation and monitoring of the programme at state and district level from available 
manpower under ATMA/ Extension functionaries. 
III. District Level 
The scheme will be implemented through State Department of Agriculture in the identified 
districts in a cluster approach. A Programme Management Group (PMG) would be constituted 
under the chairmanship of Additional Collector/ Chief Development officer (CDO) of the district 
with the following constituents: 
1.  
Additional Collector 
Chairman 
2.  
District Agriculture Officer (DAO) 
Member Secretary 
3.  
Representative of Forest Department 
Member 
4.  
Representative of Department of Food 
Processing 
Member 
5 
State Agriculture University 
Member 
6. 
Representative of KVK (Crop Production ) 
Member 
 
PMG will be fully responsible for identification of beneficiaries for cluster demonstrations of 
alternate crops to paddy and collaborate with other stakeholders for implementation of 
programme at field level. 
 
 

133 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
B.8.5 Pattern of assistance for Activities 
i. 
Cluster Demonstrations 
Cluster demonstration units (one unit=10 hectares) of identified alternate crops in each district will 
be organized through identified beneficiaries groups by State Department of Agriculture. One 
progressive farmer will be designated as group leader for organization of cluster demonstration. 
Honorarium of Rs.2000/ per cluster demonstration of 10 ha will be provided in one time basis for 
organization of cluster demonstration. Assistance @ of Rs.10000 per ha for Maize, kharif pulses 
( arhar, mung bean, urd bean, cluster bean ), oilseeds ( soybean, til) and Rs.10000/- perhectare 
for poplar based agro-forestry system for sole crop. The financial assistance of Rs 10000 per 
hectare expect poplar based agro-forestry system will be given in the form of Rs. 5000 for critical 
inputs including honorarium & other activities, Rs.2500 for land development and Rs.2500 for 
marketing support. An amount of Rs. 5000/- per hectare for inter-cropping of pulses and wheat 
will be provided to the farmers in the terms of critical inputs for organization of demonstrations. 
District Programme Management Group (PMG) will be responsible for arrangement of critical 
inputs for organizing cluster demonstrations. All critical inputs will be ensured by the State 
Department of Agriculture (SDA) well in advance before the sowing/transplanting of the 
crops. State will decide crop specific cluster demonstrations as per the availability of quality 
seeds of identified alternate crops. Crop & component-specific pattern of assistance is given 
as under: 
S.N. 
Components 
Crops 
Maize , kharif pulses 
( Arhar, mungbean, 
urd bean,) cluster 
bean, 
oilseeds 
and 
Bsa
(directed seeded) 
Eucalyptus 
( water logged conditions
) 
Poplar/ based agrofore
system for sole 
A. 
 
Cost 
of 
Critical 
inputs(seeds, 
micronutrients, seed 
treating chemical & 
P.P chemical etc 
4500 
9500 
Production 
technology 
& 
publicity materials 
150  __  
200 
_________ 1 5 0   
200 
Honorarium 
& 
mobility to group 
leader 
of 
cluster 
demonstration 

134 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Visit of GOI/State 
officials for hiring of 
vehicle or POL 
150 
150 
Sun —total 
5000 
10000 
B. 
 
Land development 
Charges* 
2500 
- 
C. 
 
Marketing Support ( 
store bin etc)** 
2500 
- 
D 
Inter 
crops 
with 
poplar 
(critical 
inputs) 
- 
5000 
Grand —Total 
10000 
15000 
 
* &** Land development charge and marketing support will he paid to the farmers in cash to 
support the losses incurred due to diversion of area from paddy to alternate crops. 
 
ii. 
Farm mechanization, processing and value addition 
In order to create sustainability in diversion of paddy area to alternate crops, the necessity of 
farm machinery, agro-processing and value addition is of immense importance. An amount of 
23 % of total state allocation is earmarked for farm machinery, processing and value addition 
items. The crop specific farm machinery will be provided to the farming community (group of 
10 farmers) on custom hiring basis. An assistance @ of 50% cost of machine limiting to Rs. 
25000/- for Maize sheller, Rs.5.00 lakh for portable maize dryer, Rs. 3000 for powered sprayer, 
Rs.25000 multi-crop thresher, Rs. 2.0 lakh for portable cleaner cum grader for pulses and Rs. 
10.00 lakh maize processing unit etc. 
 
iii. 
Site Specific activities 
An amount of 15 % of total state allocation is earmarked for site specific activities. The identified 
site specific activities to promote alternate crops should be included in the action plan to be 
submitted by the respective state. 
iv. 
Incentive for implementation of programme 
An amount of 10 % of total state allocation is earmarked and kept at central level for incentive 
to the state for implementation of the programme through diversion of paddy area to alternate 
crops as per target fixed. The amount will be released separately after monitoring and evaluation 
of the programme by designated agency i.e National Centre for Agricultural Economics and Policy 
Research (NCAP). 

135 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
Indicators are to be developed by NCAP for assessment of implementation of the 
programme at state, districts & individual. 
v. 
Awareness trainings, implementation and monitoring  
a) Awareness trainings 
State Departments of Agriculture would organize awareness trainings of farmers for 
diversification of paddy to other alternate crops for additional income generation, restoration 
of soil fertility, agro-processing, value addition of crop produce to make farming as a profitable 
enterprise. The State Department of Agriculture would develop training material with help of 
other line departments like Forest and SAUs. Assistance @ of Rs. 5000/- for a group of 50 
beneficiary farmers of cluster demonstration would be provided for awareness training 
programme. 
 
b) In order to effective implementation and monitoring of the programme at state and district 
level, and encouragement of effective implementation of the programme in the state & district 
level, funds @ 2% of the total state allocation is earmarked for awareness trainings , implementation 
& monitoring of the programme. Out of which an amount of Rs.2.00 lakh for state level and 
Rs.2.00 lakh per district is to be incurred for publicity, organization of review meetings, 
implementation & monitoring visits, contingencies etc. 
 
(C) Agri. Start-up & Accelerator Fund Components: 
 This component will be utilized for promotion of innovation and agri entrepreneurship by 
providing technical and financial support and nurturing an incubation ecosystem in the country. 
The Agri start- ups will provide practical, technical and business insights for end-to-end solution 
to agri. entrepreneurs through skill development and financial support. Agri start up and 
Accelerator fund will be implemented as 100% central assistance &7% funds will be earmarked 
for startup component from the total budget of DPR based component of RKVY. 
The Agri Accelerator Fund will help scale up start-ups with innovative ideas/ technologies 
having the potential to modernize the agriculture ecosystem of the country. This initiative is 
envisioned to help farmers by supporting innovations at scale that does value addition to the 
agricultural processes, establish a more efficient and effective supply chain and create market 
linkages etc. for significant improvement in the farmer’s income and boost agricultural 
economy. 
Detailed guidelines of Agri. Start-up /Agri Accelerator Fund have  been issued separately.  

136 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
15. Administrative Expenses & Contingencies: 
The State can useup to 2.5% of its total PM-RKVY funds for incurring administrative 
expenditure that includes Monitoring and Evaluation, payment to consultants, recurring 
expenses of various kinds, staff costs, etc. DA&FW may retain 2.5% of the PM-RKVY scheme 
funds at the Central level for UTs, evaluation activities, publicity, conducting studies, IEC 
activities on various components of PM-RKVY schemes and for hiring Project Management 
Unit (PMU) at Central level for implementation and monitoring of the scheme. The Nodal 
Agency of the State may hire Consultants /Consulting agencies to prepare DPR/AAP from the 
admin fund.   
An integrated Project Management Unit (PMU)for implementation and monitoring of DPR 
component & AAP based components will be set up at DA&FW. Consultants, technical staff 
and other resource persons as part of Project Management Unit (PMU) will be hired on 
contractual basis. 
16. Monitoring & Evaluation: 
RKVY-Management Information System 
(RKVY-MIS): States  will be responsible for timely submission/updating project data online 
in the MIS web-based Management Information System(MIS) developed by Govt of India for 
DPR/AAP component under PM -RKVY on monthly/quarterly basis to provide current and 
authenticated data on outputs/outcome of DPR as well as AAP components of PM-RKVY.   
Geo-tagging of assets created under all components of RKVY shall be made by States and 
project status of all such assets should mandatorily be uploaded through Krishi Mapper 
App/Mobile app for monitoring. The detailed user manual to operate the field inspection module 
of Krishi Mapper may be accessed from the https://krishimapper.dac.gov.in.  
Twenty five percent (25%) of the projects sanctioned by the State each year under all 
components of RKVY shall have to be compulsorily taken up for third party monitoring and 
evaluation by the implementing States/UTs. 
The State Government will be free to choose any reputed agencies for conducting the 
monitoring and evaluation work in their States. Requisite fees/cost to wards monitoring & 
evaluation will be met by the State Government from the 2.5% allocation retained by them for 
administrative expenses or from their own resources 
At Government of India Level, Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare will conduct 
concurrent evaluation, mid-term and end-term evaluation of all the scheme components by a 

137 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
suitable 3rd party. The performance of the States will be reflected in the Outcome Budget 
document of this Ministry. 
 
17. Convergence: There is a need to optimise efforts through inter-sectoral approaches to 
facilitate sustainable development.  States shall ensure convergence of PM-RKVY with various 
ongoing Central Schemes/ programmes of Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Ministry 
of Food Processing Industries, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Water Resources etc. to deliver better 
outcomes and optimal and effective utilization of available resources. It will bring in synergies 
between different programmes / schemes of Central and State Governments in terms of 
planning, process and implementation. 
 
18.Changes in the PM-RKVY: Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Govt. of India may effect changes in the PM-
RKVY guidelines, other than those affecting the financing pattern as the scheme evolves, 
whenever such changes are considered necessary. 
 
19. Applicability of guidelines: 
These guidelines are applicable to all the States and Union Territories for all components of 
restructured PM-RKVY. 
 
 
 
 
 

138 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
 
Annexure-I 
 
 
Format for Submitting the Minutes of SLSC 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No.  
Particulars  
Total Approved 
Amount  
(As approved by 
SLSC) 
 (in lakhs)  
1 
Name of the Components  
(RKVY DPR/PDMC/RAD / SH&F / PKVY etc.) 
(Separate sheet for each component) 
2 
Implementing Departments / Agencies  
3 
Allocation of the each component 
 
4 
Project Cost  
5 
Resolution  
 
6 
Convergences  
7 
Final Remarks / Observations  (if any)  
 
 
 
Format – I  

139 
 
*** PM-RKVY Guidelines *** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-II 
 
Details of activities/projects as approved by SLSC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of the Activities / 
Projects / Sub – 
Components  
Physical Outlay as 
approved by SLSC   
(No/Units/etc)  
Financial Outlay 
as recommended 
by SLSC     
(Rs. in lakh)  
Final Remarks / 
Observation of 
SLSC   
1 
 
2 
 
 
 
3 
 
Total 
 
 
 
 
Format – II 

140 
 
 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Compone
nts 
SNA 
balance 
(As on 
date) 
SNA 09  
Alloc
ation 
(GoI 
share
) 
Allocati
on 
(State 
share) 
Total 
(GoI + 
State 
Share) 
Committed 
Liability 
(All 
previous 
years) 
New 
Projects 
Cost 
Total fund 
requiremen
t 
(Committed 
Liability + 
New 
Projects 
Cost) 
125% of 
allocatio
n  (As 
approve
d by 
SLSC) 
Remar
ks 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 = 
(5+6) 
8 
9 
10= (8+9) 
11 
12 
 
Format – III 

141 
 
Annexure-III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: 
(i) Component -wise UCs may be furnished for General, SCSP, & TSP separately  
(ii) Sanction No. and date of sanction for release of State share fund should be mentioned in UC. 
 
 
 

142 
 
Annexure:IV 
Inter State Allocation of the funds under RKVY - DPR 
 
Inter-State allocation of RKVY-DPR funds will be based on the following parameters and 
weights: 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Criteria/Parameters 
Weightage 
1 
Percentage share of net un-irrigated area in a State to the net un-
irrigated area of all States. 
20% 
2 
Percentage of small and marginal farmers in the state compared to total 
number of small and marginal farmers in the country. 
30% 
3 
Average Gross State Value Added (GSVA) in agriculture and allied 
sectors in the last 3 years. 
25% 
4 
Percentage of youth population in the state compared to total youth 
in the country. 
10% 
5 
Inverse of Yield gap between state average yield and potential yields 
as indicated in the frontline demonstration data. 
15% 
 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare could modify above criteria/weights depending upon new 
parameters be coming relevant in future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

143 
 
Annexure-V 
Composition of State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) 
 
 
Chief Secretary 
- 
Chairman 
Agri. Prod. Commissioner/ACS/Principal Secretary(Agriculture) 
- 
Vice-Chairman 
Secretary, Finance 
- 
Member 
Secretary, Planning 
- 
Member 
Secretary, Environment and Forests 
- 
Member 
Secretary, Panchayati Raj 
- 
Member 
Secretary, Rural Development 
- 
Member 
Secretary, Water Resources/Irrigation/Minor Irrigation 
- 
Member 
Director, Agriculture 
- 
Member 
Director, Horticulture 
- 
Member 
Representative of State Agriculture University 
- 
Member 
Representative of NITI  Aayog 
- 
Member 
Secretary, Agriculture 
- 
Member-Secretary 
 
Note: 
 
1. SLSC may co-opt two more members from reputed NGOs working in the field of Agriculture, 
Deputy Commissioners of important districts, and leading farmers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

144 
 
Annexure-VI 
 
ILLUSTRATIVE LIST OF PROJECTS/ACTIVITIES THAT SHOULD NOT BE FUNDED UNDER 
RKVY- DPR component 
 
 
1. 
Creation/topping up of any kind of revolving fund / corpus fund; 
 
2. 
Expenditure towards maintenance of assets or any such recurring expenses; 
 
3. 
Expenses towards Salary, Transport, Travelling Allowances (TA), Daily Allowances (DA) of 
permanent /semi-permanent employees. However, expenses towards hiring of man power on 
outsourcing/contractual basis can be met within 2.5% allocation earmarked for administrative 
expenses with approval of SLSC. 
4. 
Expenses towards POL (Petrol, Oil, Lubricants); 
 
5. 
Financing State’s share and/or topping up subsidy level in respect with other 
Central/State Schemes; 
6. 
Foreign Visits/Tours including study tours of farmers abroad; 
 
7. 
Purchase of vehicles; 
 
8. 
Financing any kind of debt waiver, interest subvention, payment of insurance premium, 
compensation to farmers and calamity relief expenditure; additional bonus over & above 
Minimum Support Price (MSP); 
9. 
Creating/Strengthening assets in Private Sector/NGO’s beyond what is permissible under 
any schemes/programmes of Govt. of India. 
10. Projects pertaining to allied sectors like Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries, 
Sericulture and Forests (like production and processing of lac). 
11. Plantation crops like Tea, rubber and coffee etc.  
12. Construction of boundary walls of Govt. agriculture farms and individual farms. 
13. Projects related to soil and water conservation works like reclamation of problem soils, 
desalination of soil etc 
14. Furnishing of offices, hostels including purchase of computers/ printers etc may be taken 
up from Administrative expenses available with the State Govt.  
15. State universities projects pertaining to AHD&F activities.  
16. Production of Feed and Fodder grasses. 
 
 
 
 

145 
 
Annexure-VII 
Detailed Project Report 
 
FORMAT 
 
ii. 
Context/Background: This section should provide a general description of the scheme/project being posed 
for appraisal. 
iii. 
Problems to be addressed: This section should describe the problem to be addressed through the 
project/scheme at the local/regional/national level. Evidence regarding the nature and magnitude of the 
problems should be presented, supported by baseline data/survey/reports etc. 
iv. 
Aims and Objectives: This section should indicate the development objectives proposed to be achieved, 
ranked in order of importance. The outputs/deliverables expected for each development objective should be 
spelt out clearly. 
v. 
Strategy: This section should present an analysis of alternative strategies available to achieve the 
development objectives. Reasons for selecting the proposed strategy should be brought out. Basis for 
prioritization of locations should be indicated (wherever relevant). This section should also provide a 
description of the ongoing initiatives, and the manner in which duplication can be avoided and synergy 
created with the proposed project. 
vi. 
Target Beneficiaries: There should be a clear identification of target beneficiaries. Stakeholder analysis 
should be undertaken, including consultation with stakeholders at the time of scheme/project formulation. 
Impact of the project on weaker sections of society, positive or negative, should be assessed and remedial 
steps suggested in case of any adverse impact. 
vii. 
Management: Responsibilities of different agencies for project management of scheme implementation 
should be elaborated. The organization structure at various levels, human resource requirements, as well as 
monitoring arrangements should be clearly spelt out. 
viii. 
Finance: This section should focus on the cost estimates, budget for the scheme/project, means of financing 
and phasing of expenditure. Options for cost sharing and cost recovery (user charges) should be explored. 
Issues relating to project sustainability, including stakeholder commitment, operation-maintenance of assets 
after project completion and other related issues should also be addressed in this section. 
ix. 
Time Frame: This section should indicate the proposed zero date for commencement and also provide a 
PERT/CPM chart, wherever relevant. 
x. 
Cost Benefit Analysis: Financial and economic cost-benefit analysis of the project should be under taken 
wherever such returns are quantifiable. Such an analysis should generally be possible for infrastructure 
projects, but may not always be feasible for public goods and social sector projects. 
xi. 
Risk Analysis: This section should focus on identification and assessment of risks in implementation and 
how these are proposed to be mitigated. Risk analysis could include legal/contractual risks, environmental 
risks, revenue risks, project management risks, regulatory risks, etc. 
xii. 
Outcomes: Criteria to assess success and whether or not the development objectives have been achieved 
should be spelt out in measurable terms. Base-line data should be available against which success of the 
project will be assessed at the end of the project (impact assessment). Success criterion for scheme 
deliverables/outcomes should also be specified in measurable terms to assess achievement against proximate 
goals. 
xiii. 
Evaluation: Evaluation arrangements for the project, whether concurrent, mid-term or post-project should 
be clearly spelt out. It may be noted that continuation of schemes from one period to another will not be 
permissible without a third-party evaluation. 
xiv. Last but not the least, a self-contained Executive Summary should be placed at the beginning of the document 

146 
 
Annexure:VIII 
 
Illustrative List of Projects that can be funded under RKVY-DPR (Infrastructure& 
Assets) 
1. Climate Resilient Agriculture 
- 
Area specific projects to address local impacts of climate change 
- 
Training programs with quantifiable outcomes 
- 
Demonstration of climate resilient varieties 
 
2. Horticulture 
- 
Cluster of new crops (both exotic & indigenous) not covered under existing schemes 
- 
Hydroponics & aeroponics for production of quality seed & planting materials  
- 
Gaps in value chain of predominant crops 
- 
Demonstrations of new varieties, including Tomato, Onion and Potato  
 
3. Seeds 
- 
Seed testing labs, including strengthening & upgradation 
- 
Support for development and modernization of State seed farms and nurseries, for multiplication of 
seeds and planting materials.  
- 
State seed processing facilities for gap filling, including dehumidified refrigerated storage.  
- 
Seed Certification Agencies & Certification Infrastructure 
 
4. Marketing & Post Harvest 
- 
Projects for specific gaps in marketing infrastructure 
 
 
5. Pest Management & Pesticide Quality Control 
- 
Support for State labs for testing pesticide residues, pesticide & biopesticide testing labs 
- 
Specific area-based projects for pest control or reduction.  
 
6. Soil Nutrient Management 
- 
Establishment and Upgradation of soil testing laboratories to include micro nutrient testing & micro- 
organism testing & infective agents.  
 
7. Bio Fertilizers/ Organic Farming 
- 
Quality control labs 
- 
Bio pesticide units, liquid carrier-based units.  
 
8. Integrated Manure Management 
- 
State units for liquid bio-fertilizer consortia, liquid bio- pesticides & phosphate rich organic manure.  
 
9. Agriculture Mechanization 
 
- 
Projects for mechanization of State farms- for intensification of agriculture, demonstration of 
techniques to save cost etc 

147 
 
- 
Post-harvest technology units for specific crops.  
 
10. Projects for gap filling for bio-ethanol & CBG projects. 
 
11. Agriculture waste to wealth projects 
- 
Economically viable and self-sustaining projects for use of agricultural waste, linked to crop clusters 
- 
Projects for alternative or new uses of crop residues for specific crops   
 
 
 
Note: 
1. The above illustrative list of projects is indicative and not exhaustive. 
2. Food processing units, especially those industries which get assistance under various schemes of 
the MoFPI, should not be eligible for assistance under RKVY. 
3. Infrastructure and Assets stream emphasizes promoting group approach for subsidies. Accordingly, 
level of subsidies in the case of unspecified projects should be kept to the minimum for higher 
coverage of beneficiaries/ areas. 
4. State should form of stake holders‟ groups/organizations involving them in planning, execution and 
future maintenance of the created assets. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

148 
 
 
Annexure:IX 
Activities relating to Production stream u n d e r  R K V Y -  D P R  c o m p o n e n t  
 
The components/ activities which would be eligible for project based assistance under RKVY-DPR are elaborated below. This is an illustrative list and the 
States may choose other components/activities, but ensure that they are reflected adequately in the SAP.  
 
a) Integrated development of major food crops such as wheat, paddy, coarse cereals, minor millets, pulses, oilseeds: Assistance can be provided 
for making available certified/HYV seeds to farmers; production of breeder seed; purchase of breeder seed from institutions such as ICAR, public 
sector seed corporations, production of foundation seed; production and distribution of certified seed; seed treatment; Farmers Field Schools at 
demonstration sites; training of farmers etc. Similar support would be provided for development of other crops such as sugarcane, cotton or any other 
crop/variety that may be of importance to the state. 
b) Agriculture mechanization: Assistance can be provided to individual beneficiaries for farm mechanization efforts especially for improved and gender 
friendly tools, implements and machinery. However, assistance for large equipment e.g. tractor, combine harvester, sugar cane harvester, cotton picker 
etc. for which individual ownership may not be economically viable, assistance should only be limited for establishing custom hiring centres under 
RKVY (Infrastructure & Assets) stream. 
c) Activities related to enhancement of soil health: Assistance can be provided to the farmers for distributing soil health cards; micro nutrient 
demonstration; training of farmers for promotion of organic farming including printing of publicity/utility literature; amelioration of soils affected with 
conditions such as alkalinity and acidity. 
d) Development of rainfed farming systems in and outside watershed areas: Assistance for promoting integrated farming system (agriculture, 
horticulture etc.) generating livelihoods for farmers Below the Poverty Line (BPL). 
e) Integrated Pest Management schemes: This would include training of farmers through Farm Field Schools etc. on pest management practices; 
printing of literature/other awareness programmes. 
 
The above list is not exhaustive. Therefore, schemes that are important for agriculture and allied sector development, but cannot be categorized under (a)to (i) can 
also be proposed under this stream. 
 
 
 
 

149 
 
Annexure-X 
 
Recommended norms for use of treated sewage quality for specified activities at point of use 
 
Landscaping, Horticulture & Agriculture 
S.N 
Parameter 
Toilet 
flushing 
Fire 
Protection 
Vehicle 
Exterior 
washing 
Non-contact 
impoundments 
Horticulture, 
Golf course 
Crops 
None
dible 
Crops 
Crops which are eaten 
Raw 
Cooked 
1 
Turbidity(NTU) 
<2 
<2 
<2 
<2 
<2 
AA 
<2 
AA 
2 
SS 
nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
nil 
30 
nil 
30 
3 
TDS 
2100 
4 
pH 
6.5to8.3 
5 
Temperature °C 
Ambient 
6 
Oil & Grease 
10 
nil 
Nil 
Nil 
10 
10 
nil 
nil 
7 
Minimum Residual 
Chlorine 
1 
1 
1 
0.5 
0 
Nil 
nil 
nil 
8 
Total K jeldahl Nitrogen as 
N 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
9 
BOD 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
20 
10 
20 
10 
COD 
AA 
AA 
AA 
AA 
AA 
30 
AA 
30 
11 
Dissolved Phosphorous as P 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
5 
2 
5 
12 
Nitrate Nitrogen as N 
10 
10 
10 
5 
10 
10 
10 
10 
13 
Faecal Coliformin 100 
Ml 
nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
nil 
230 
nil 
230 
14 
Helminthic Eggs/litre 
AA 
AA 
AA 
AA 
AA 
<1 
<1 
<1 
15 
Colour 
Colourless 
Colourless 
Colourless 
Colourless 
Colourless 
AA 
Colourless 
Colourless 
16 
Odour 
Aseptic which means motseptic and no foul odour 
All units in mg/l unless specified; AA-as arising when other parameters are satisfied; A 
toleranceofplus5%isallowablewhen yearly average values are considered. 

150 
 
Annexure-XI 
 
Format for Annual Action Plan–Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) 
A) Micro Irrigation: 
(i)District wise details: 
Sr.No. 
District(En
sure to 
cover  all 
Aspirational 
Districts, 
and 
Namami 
Gange 
Districts) 
Drip irrigation 
Sprinkler irrigation 
Total 
Field Crops 
Horticultural Crops 
Field Crops 
Horticultural Crops 
Area 
Farmers 
to  be 
benefitted 
Cost Area 
Farmers 
to  be 
benefitted 
Cost Area 
Farmers 
to  be 
benefitted 
Cost Area 
Farmers 
to  be 
benefitted 
Cost Area 
Farmers  
to be 
benefitted 
Cost 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15=3+6+9+12
16=4+7+10+1
3 
17=5+8+11+1
4 
Note: Major Crop wise details of both field & horticultural crops may be mentioned 

151 
 
(ii)State Summery (MI): 
 
 
Rs.in Lakh 
S 
No 
Activity 
Area(
ha) 
No of 
Farmers to be 
benefitted 
Subsidy 
Farmers 
Contribution 
Total 
Cost 
GOI 
Share 
Matching 
State Share 
Total 
1 
Drip 
Irrigation 
system 
2 
Sprinkler 
Irrigation 
system 
Total A 
Administrative cost-B 
Total A+B 
% MI cost to total AAP 
…………..
% 

152 
 
 
B) 
Other Interventions (Optional)- Linked with Micro irrigation(i)District wise 
details:  
Rs.in lakh 
SN 
District 
Activity1 
Activity2…….. 
Quantity 
Unit 
Unit rate 
(Rs.) 
cost 

153 
 
(ii)State Summary(OI): 
Rs.in Lakh 
S
N 
Activity 
Quantity 
Unit 
Unit 
rate 
No of 
Farmers to be 
benefitted 
Subsidy 
Farmers 
contribution 
Total 
Cost 
GOI 
Share 
Matching 
State Share 
Total 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
Total A 
Administrative cost-B 
Total A+B 
%OI cost to total AAP 
…………..% 

154 
 
Annexure-XII 
 
Format for Physical Progress Monitoring Report for Per Drop More Crop (Micro Irrigation) 
 
Name of the State: 
Period of the report: 
Area in hectare: 
Name of 
District 
Physical Target 
Total 
Physical 
Target 
Physical Achievement 
Total Physical 
Achievement 
% 
Achievement 
Horticulture 
Agriculture 
Horticulture 
Agriculture 
Drip 
Sprinkler 
Drip 
Sprinkler 
Drip 
Sprinkler 
Drip 
Sprinkler 

155 
 
Annexure-XII b 
Format for Financial Progress Monitoring Report for Per Drop More Crop (Micro Irrigation) 
 
 
Name of 
District 
Name of the State: 
Period of the report: 
Rs. in Lakh 
Financial Target 
Financial Achievement 
% 
Achievement 
Horticulture 
Agriculture 
Training 
Seminar 
/Exhibiti
on 
Scheme 
Admin 
. Cost 
Total 
Financia
l Target 
Horticulture 
Agriculture 
Training 
Seminar 
/Exhibiti
on 
Scheme 
Admin 
. Cost 
Total 
Financial 
Achievement 
Dri
p 
Sprinkle
r 
Dri
p 
Sprinkle
r 
Dri
p 
Sprinkle
r 
Dri
p 
Sprinkle
r 

156 
 
Annexure- XIII 
 
 
Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities for 0.2 ha at farmer's field  
 
 
SN 
Component/Lateral to Lateral x Dripper spacing (mxm) 
Unit 
12x12 
10x10 
9x9 
8x8 
6x6 
5x5 
4x4 
3x3 
2.5x2.5 
2x2 
1.5x1.5 
2.5x0.6 
1.8x0.6 
1.5x0.6 
1.2x0.6 
Control Unit 
1 
Screen filter 10m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
Ventury & manifold(11/2") 
No. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 
Air releaseValve1" 
No. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Non Return Valve-1.5" 
No. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
By-passAssembly-1.5"x1.5" 
No. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Field Unit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
PVCPipe50mm, class-III;6kg/cm2 
m 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
48 
48 
48 
48 
48 
48 
7 
Lateral 12mm,ClassII;2.5kg/cm2 
m 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1010 
1347 
20 
27 
32 
40 
8 
EmittingPipe12mm;Class II:(0.6mx1to4lph) 
m 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0 
0 
808 
1122 
1347 
1683 
9 
Emitter/Dripper 4/ 8lph 
No. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1020 
907 
0 
0 
0 
0 
10 
Control Valve 50mm 
No. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
11 
FlushValve50mm 
No. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
12 
Throttle Valve- 1.5" 
No. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
13 
Fittings/installation & Accessories @5% 
set 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Note: The above items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is subject to ceiling of cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

157 
 
Annexure-XIII b 
Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities for 0.4 ha at farmer's field 
 
SN 
Component/Lateral to Lateral x 
Dripper spacing (mxm) 
Unit 12X12 
10X10 
9 x9 
8 X8 6 X6 5 X5 
4 X4 
3 X3 
2.5X2.5 
2 X2 
1.5X1.5 
2.5X0.6 
1.8X0.6 
1.5X0.6 
1.2X0.6 
Control Unit 
1 
Screen filter 10 m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
Ventury & manifold(11/2") 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 
Air release Valve 1" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Non Return Valve -1.5" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
By-passAssembly-1.5"x1.5" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Field Unit 
6 
PVCPipe63mm,class-II;4kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
30 
30 
30 
0 
0 
0 
0 
7 
PVCPipe50mm,class-III; 6kg/cm2 
m 
96 
96 
96 
96 
96 
96 
96 
96 
66 
66 
66 
96 
96 
96 
96 
8 
Lateral12mm,ClassII;2.5 kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1616 
2020 
2693 
38 
53 
64 
79 
9 
Emitting Pipe 12 mm; Class II: (0.6 m x1 
to 4lph) 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1616 
2245 
2693 
3367 
10 
Lateral12mm, Class II ;2.5kg/cm2 
m 
339 
406 
452 
508 
677 
813 
1016 
1355 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
11 
Emitter/Dripper 4/8lph 
No. 
113 
163 
201 
255 
453 
653 
510 
907 
1293 
2010 
1796 
0 
0 
0 
0 
12 
Control Valve 63mm 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
13 
Control Valve 50mm 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
14 
Flush Valve63mm 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
15 
Flush Valve50mm 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
16 
Throttle Valve -2" 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
17 
Throttle Valve -1.5" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
18 
Fittings/Installation&Accessories@5% 
set 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
 
Note: The above items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is subject to ceiling of cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 

158 
 
 
 
Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities for 1.0 ha at farmer's field 
Annexure-XIII c 
 
SN 
Component/ Lateral to Lateral x 
Dripper spacing (mxm) 
Unit 12X12 10X10 
9 x9 
8 X8 
6 X6 
5 X5 
4 X 4 
3 X3 
2.5X2.5 
2 X2 
1.5X1.5 
2.5X0.6 
1.8X0.6 
1.5X0.6 1.2X0.6 
Control Unit 
1 
Screen filter 20/25m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
Ventury & manifold(2") 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 
AirreleaseValve1" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Non Return Valve -1.5" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
By-passAssembly-1.5"x1.5" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Field Unit 
6 
PVCPipe75mm,class-II;4kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
54 
54 
54 
54 
54 
54 
54 
54 
7 
PVCPipe63mm,class-II;4kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
54 
156 
156 
102 
102 
102 
102 
102 
102 
102 
102 
8 
PVCPipe50mm,class-III;6kg/cm2 
m 
156 
156 
156 
156 
102 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
9 
Lateral 16mm,Class II;2.5kg/cm2 
m 
833 
1000 
1111 
1250 
1667 
2000 
2500 
3333 
4000 
5000 
6667 
60 
83 
100 
125 
10 
Emitting Pipe 16 mm; Class II: (0.6 m x1 
to 4lph) 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4040 
5611 
6733 
8417 
11 
Emitter/Dripper 4/8lph 
No. 
278 
400 
494 
625 
1111 
1600 
1275 
2267 
3232 
5050 
4489 
0 
0 
0 
0 
12 
Control Valve 75mm 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
13 
Control Valve 63mm 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
14 
Control Valve 50mm 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
15 
FlushValve63mm 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
16 
FlushValve50mm 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
17 
Throttle Valve -2" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
18 
Fittings/Instalation&Accessories@5% 
set 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Note: The above items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is subject to ceiling of cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 

159 
 
 
 
Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities for 2.0 ha at farmer's field 
Annexure-XIII d 
 
SN 
Component/ Lateral to Lateral x 
Dripper spacing (mxm) 
Unit 12X12 10X10 
9 x9 
8 X8 
6 X6 
5 X5 
4 X4 
3 X3 
2.5 X 2.5 
2 X2 
1.5 X 1.5 
2.5X0.6 
1.8X0.6 
1.5X0.6 
1.2X0.6 
Control Unit 
1 
Screen filter 20/25m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
Ventury & manifold(2") 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 
AirreleaseValve1" 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Non Return Valve -1.5" 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
By-passAssembly-1.5"x1.5" 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Field Unit 
6 
PVCPipe75mm,class-II;4kg/cm2 
m 
78 
78 
78 
78 
78 
78 
78 
78 
78 
78 
78 
78 
78 
78 
78 
7 
PVCPipe63mm,class-II;4kg/cm2 
m 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
8 
Lateral 16mm,Class II;2.5kg/cm2 
m 
1850 
2130 
2350 
2600 
3500 
4200 
5200 
6900 
8250 
11000 14000 
120 
150 
170 
200 
9 
Emitting Pipe 16 mm; Class II: (0.6 
mx1to 4lph) 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
8200 
11500 
13600 
17000 
10 
Emitter/Dripper 4/8lph 
No. 600 
800 
1000 
1300 
2300 
3300 
2600 
4800 
6600 
10400 9000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
11 
Control Valve 75mm 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
12 
Control Valve 63mm 
No. 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
13 
FlushValve63mm 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
14 
Throttle Valve -2" 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
15 
Fittings/Instalation&Accessories@5% 
set 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Note: The above items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is subject to ceiling of cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 

160 
 
Annexure-XIII e 
 
Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities for 3.0 ha at farmer's field 
 
SN 
Component/ Lateral to Lateral x 
Dripper spacing (mxm) 
Unit 12X12 
10X10 9 x9 
8 X8 6 X6 
5 X5 
4 X4 
3 X3 
2.5X2.5 
2 X2 
1.5 X 1.5 
2.5X0.6 
1.8 X0.6 1.5X0.6 
1.2X0.6 
Control Unit 
1 
Screen filter30m3/hr/ Disc filter 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
Screen filter20/ 25m3/hr/Disc filter 
No 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
Ventury & manifold(2") 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
AirreleaseValve1" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
NonReturnValve-2" 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
6 
Non Return Valve–1.5" 
No 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
7 
By-passAssembly-2"x1.5" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Field Unit 
8 
PVC Pipe 90mm,class-II; 4kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
90 
90 
90 
90 
90 
90 
90 
9 
PVC Pipe 75mm,class-II; 4kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
216 
216 
216 
216 
132 
132 
132 
132 
132 
132 
132 
10 
PVC Pipe63mm,class-II;4kg/cm2 
m 
216 
216 
216 
216 
336 
336 
336 
336 
174 
174 
174 
174 
174 
174 
174 
11 
PVC Pipe50mm,class-III; 6kg/cm2 
m 
336 
336 
336 
336 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
12 
Lateral16mm, ClassII; 2.5kg/cm2 
m 
2500 
3000 
3333 
3750 5000 
6000 
7500 
10000 
12120 
15150 20200 
156 
217 
260 
325 
13 
Emitting Pipe 16 mm; Class II: (0.6 
mx1to 4lph) 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
12120 
16833 
20200 
25250 
14 
Emitter/Dripper 4/8lph 
No. 
833 
1200 
1481 
1875 3333 
2400 
3750 
6667 
9696 
15150 13467 
0 
0 
0 
0 
15 
Control Valve 90mm 
No 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
16 
Control Valve 75mm 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
17 
Control Valve 63mm 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
18 
Control Valve 50mm 
No 
4 
4 
4 
4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
19 
Flush Valve75mm 
No 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
20 
Flush Valve63mm 
No. 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
21 
Throttle Valve -2" 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
22 
Throttle Valve–1.5" 
No 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
23 
Fittings/Installation&Accessories@5% 
set 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Note: The above items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is subject to ceiling of cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 

161 
 
Annexure-XIII f 
 
Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities for 4.0 ha at farmer's field 
 
SN 
Component/ Lateral to Lateral x 
Dripper spacing (mxm) 
Unit 12X12 10X10 
9 x9 
8 X8 
6 X6 
5 X5 
4 X4 
3 X 3 
2.5X2.5 
2 X2 
1.5 X 1.5 2.5X0.6 
1.8X0.6 1.5X0.6 
1.2X0.6 
Control Unit 
1 
Screen filter 30m3/hr/ Disc filter 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
Screen filter 20/ 25m3/hr/Disc filter 
No 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
Ventury & manifold(2") 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Air release Valve1.5" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
Non Return Valve-2" 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
6 
Non Return Valve–1.5" 
No 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
7 
By-pass Assembly-2"x1.5" 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
8 
By-pass Assembly–1.5"x1.5" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Field Unit 
9 
PVC Pipe 90mm,class-II; 4kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
138 
138 
138 
138 
138 
138 
138 
10 
PVC Pipe 75mm,class-II; 4kg/cm2 
m 
222 
222 
222 
222 
222 
222 
222 
222 
276 
276 
276 
276 
276 
276 
276 
11 
PVC Pipe 63mm,class-II; 4kg/cm2 
m 
402 
402 
402 
402 
402 
402 
402 
402 
402 
402 
402 
402 
402 
402 
402 
12 
Lateral 16mm, Class II; 2.5kg/cm2 
m 
3400 
4080 
4533 
5100 
6800 
8160 
10200 13600 
16160 
20200 
26933 
180 
250 
300 
375 
13 
Emitting Pipe 16 mm; Class II: (0.6 
mx1to 4lph) 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
16000 
22000 
26950 
33100 
15 
Emitter/Dripper 4/8lph 
No. 
1133 
1632 
2015 
2550 
4533 
4896 
7700 
9244 
12800 
20000 
17800 
0 
0 
0 
0 
16 
Control Valve 90mm 
No 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
17 
Control Valve 75mm 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
18 
Control Valve 63mm 
No. 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
19 
Flush Valve 75mm 
No 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
20 
Flush Valve 63mm 
No. 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
21 
Throttle Valve -2" 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
22 
Throttle Valve–1.5" 
No 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
23 
Fittings/Installation & Accessories @5% 
set 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Note: The above items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is subject to ceiling of cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 

162 
 
 
 
Drip Irrigation Technology- Indicative Bill of Quantities 5.0 ha at farmer’s field 
Annexure-XIII g 
 
 
SN 
Component/ Lateral to Lateral x 
Dripper spacing (mxm) 
Unit 
12X12 
10X10 
9 x9 
8 X8 
6 X6 
5 X5 
4 X 4 
3X3 
2.5X2.5 
2 X2 
1.5X1.5 
2.5X0.6 
1.8X0.6 1.5X0.6 
1.2X0.6 
Control Unit 
1 
Screen filter 30m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
Screen filter20/25m3/hr/Disc filter 
No 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
Ventury & manifold(21/2") 
No 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Ventury & manifold(2") 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5 
Air release Valve1.5" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
6 
Non Return Valve –2.5" 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
7 
Non Return Valve –2" 
No 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
8 
By-pass Assembly– 2.5"x2" 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
9 
By-pass Assembly- 2"x1.5" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Field Unit 
10 
PVCPipe90 mm, class-II; 4kg/cm2 
m 
114 
114 
114 
114 
114 
114 
114 
114 
168 
168 
168 
168 
168 
168 
168 
11 
PVCPipe75 mm, class-II; 4kg/cm2 
m 
168 
168 
168 
168 
168 
168 
168 
168 
342 
342 
342 
342 
342 
342 
342 
12 
PVCPipe63 mm, class-II; 4kg/cm2 
m 
450 
450 
450 
450 
450 
450 
450 
450 
456 
456 
456 
456 
456 
456 
456 
13 
Lateral16mm, Class II; 2.5kg/cm2 
m 
4250 
5100 
5667 
6375 
8500 
10200 
12750 
17000 
20200 
25250 
33667 
268 
373 
447 
559 
14 
Emitting Pipe 16 mm; Class II: (0.6m 
x1to 4lph) 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
20200 
28056 
33667 
42083 
15 
Emitter/Dripper 4/8lph 
No. 
1417 
2040 
2519 
3188 
5667 
8160 
6500 
11556 
16160 
25250 
22444 
0 
0 
0 
0 
16 
Control Valve 90mm 
No 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
17 
Control Valve 75mm 
No. 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
18 
Control Valve 63mm 
No. 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
19 
Flush Valve 75mm 
No 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
20 
Flush Valve 63mm 
No. 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
21 
Throttle Valve–2.5" 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
22 
Throttle Valve–2" 
No 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
23 
Fittings/Installation & Accessories 
@5% 
set 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Note: The above items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is subject to ceiling of cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 

163 
 
Annexure-XIII h 
 
NEH States-Drip Irrigation Technology -Indicative Bill of Quantities for 0.2 ha at farmer's field 
 
SN 
Component/ Lateral to Lateral x Dripper 
spacing(mxm) 
Unit 
12x12 
10x10 
9x9 
8x8 
6x6 
5x5 
4x4 
3x3 
2.5x2.5 
2x2 
1.5x1.5 
2.5x0.6 
1.8x0.6 
1.5x0.6 
1.2x0.6 
Control Unit 
1 
Screen filter 10m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
Ventury & manifold(11/2") 
No. - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 
Air release Valve1" 
No. - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Non Return Valve-1.5" 
No. - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
By-pass Assembly-1.5"x1.5" 
No. - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
6 
Field Unit 
7 
HDPE Pipe 50mm; 4kg/cm2 
m 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
54 
54 
54 
54 
54 
54 
8 
Lateral 12mm, Class II; 2.5 kg/cm2 
m 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1010 
1347 
20 
27 
32 
40 
9 
Emitting Pipe 12mm; Class II: (0.2-0.3mx 1 to 2-4 
lph) 
m 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0 
0 
808 
1122 
1347 
1683 
10 
Pressure regulating Emitter/Dripper 2/4/8lph 
No. - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1020 
907 
0 
0 
0 
0 
11 
Control Valve 50mm 
No. - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
12 
Control Valve 63mm 
No. - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
13 
Flush Valve 50mm 
No. - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
14 
Throttle Valve -1.5" 
No. - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
15 
Fittings/Installation & Accessories @5% 
set - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
 
Note: The above items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is subject to ceiling of cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 

164 
 
Annexure-XIII i 
NEH States- Drip Irrigation Technology- Indicative Bill of Quantities for 0.4 ha at farmer’s field 
 
 
SN 
Component/ Lateral to Lateral x 
Dripper spacing(mxm) 
Unit 
12 X12 
10X10 
9x9 
8X8 
6 X6 
5 X5 
4 X4 
3X3 
2.5 X2.5 
2 X2 
1.5X1.5 
2.5X0.6 
1.8X0.6 
1.5X0.6 
1.2X0.6 
Control Unit 
1 
HDPE Pipe50mm;4kg/cm2 
m 
104 
104 
104 
104 
104 
104 
104 
104 
104 
104 
104 
104 
104 
104 
104 
2 
HDPE Pipe63mm;4kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
30 
30 
30 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
Lateral 12mm, Class II ;2.5kg/cm2 
m 
339 
406 
452 
508 
677 
813 
1016 
1355 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
Lateral 16mm, Class II; 2.5kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1616 
2020 
2693 
38 
53 
64 
79 
5 
Emitting Pipe 16 mm; Class II: (0.2-
0.3mx1to 2-4 lph) 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1616 
2245 
2693 
3367 
6 
Pressure regulating 
Emitter/Dripper2/ 4/8lph 
No. 
113 
163 
201 
255 
453 
490 
765 
1360 
1306 
2010 
3627 
0 
0 
0 
0 
7 
Control Valve 50mm 
No. 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
4 
4 
4 
4 
8 
Control Valve 63mm 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
9 
Flush Valve 50mm 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
4 
4 
4 
10 
Air release Valve 1" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
11 
Non Return Valve -1.5" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
12 
Throttle Valve -1.5" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
13 
Screen filter 10m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
14 
By-pass Assembly- 1.5" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
15 
Ventury & manifold-1.5" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
16 
Fittings/Installation & Accessories 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
 
Note: The above items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is subject to ceiling of cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 

165 
 
 
 
Annexure-XIII j 
 
NEH States- Drip Irrigation Technology- Indicative Bill of Quantities for 1.0 ha at farmer’s field 
 
SN 
Component/ Lateral to Lateral x 
Dripper spacing(mxm) 
Unit 12X12 
10X10 
9x9 
8X8 
6X 6 
5 X5 
4X4 
3 X3 
2.5X2.5 
2 X2 
1.5X1.5 
2.5X0.6 
1.8X0.6 
1.5X0.6 
1.2X0.6 
Control Unit 
1 
HDPE Pipe40mm;6kg/cm2 
m 
172 
172 
172 
172 
112 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
HDPE Pipe50mm;4kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
60 
172 
172 
172 
172 
172 
172 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
HDPE Pipe63mm;4kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
60 
60 
60 
60 
118 
118 
118 
118 
4 
HDPE Pipe75mm;4kg/cm2 
M 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
62 
62 
62 
62 
5 
Lateral12mm, Class II ;2.5kg/cm2 
m 
980 
1150 
1300 
1400 1800 
2000 
2500 
3333 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
6 
Lateral16mm, Class II; 2.5kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4040 
5050 
6733 
60 
83 
100 
125 
7 
Emitting Pipe 16 mm; Class II: (0.2-
0.3mx1to 2-4 lph) 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4040 
5611 
6733 
8717 
8 
Pressure regulating Emitter/ 
Dripper2/4/ 8lph 
No. 350 
440 
540 
650 
1150 
1224 
1913 
3400 
3232 
5050 
9067 
0 
0 
0 
0 
9 
Control Valve 40mm 
No. 10 
10 
10 
10 
0 
0 
0 
0 
7 
7 
7 
0 
0 
0 
0 
10 
Control Valve 50mm 
No. 0 
0 
0 
0 
10 
10 
10 
0 
3 
3 
3 
4 
4 
4 
4 
11 
Control Valve 63mm 
No. 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
10 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
12 
Control Valve 75mm 
No. 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
13 
Flush Valve50mm 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
4 
4 
4 
4 
14 
Flush Valve63mm 
No. 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
15 
AirreleaseValve1" 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
16 
Non Return Valve -1.5" 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
17 
Throttle Valve -1.5" 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
18 
Screen filter 10m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
19 
By-pass Assembly- 1.5" 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
20 
Ventury & manifold-2” 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
21 
Fittings/Installation & Accessories 
5% 5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
 
Note: The above items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is subject to ceiling of cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 

166 
 
 
Annexure-XIII k 
 
NEH States-Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities for 2.0 ha at farmer’s field 
 
SN Component Lateral to Lateral x 
Dripper spacing(mxm) 
Unit 
12x12 
10x10 
9x9 
8x8 
6x6 5x5 
4x4 
3x3 
2.5x2.5 
2x2 
1.5x1.5 
2.5x0.6 
1.8x0.6 
1.5 X 0.6 
1.2x0.6 
1 
HDPE Pipe50mm; 4kg/cm2 
m 
165 
165 
165 
165 
165 
165 
165 
165 
165 
165 
165 
120 
120 
120 
120 
2 
HDPE Pipe63mm;4 kg/cm2 
m 
88 
88 
88 
88 
88 
88 
88 
88 
88 
88 
88 
80 
80 
80 
80 
3 
HDPE Pipe75mm;4 kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
90 
90 
90 
90 
4 
Lateral 12mm, Class II ;2.5kg/cm2 
m 
1850 
2130 
2350 2600 3500 4200 
5200 6900 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5 
Lateral 16mm Class II, 2.5kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
8400 
11400 
14600 
120 
150 
170 
200 
6 
Emitting Pipe 16 mm; Class II: (0.2-0.3m 
x 1to 2-4 lph) 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
8200 
11500 
13600 
17000 
7 
Pressure regulating Emitter/ 
Dripper2/4/ 8lph 
No. 
600 
800 
1000 1300 2300 2448 
3825 6800 
6600 
10400 
18133 
0 
0 
0 
0 
8 
Control Valve 50mm 
No. 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
8 
8 
8 
8 
9 
Control Valve 63mm 
No. 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
4 
4 
4 
4 
10 Control Valve 75mm 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
11 Flush Valve 50mm 
No. 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
8 
8 
8 
8 
12 Flush Valve 63mm 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
4 
4 
4 
13 Air Release Valve1” 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
14 Non Return Valve 1.5” 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
15 Throttle Valve 1.5" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
16 Throttle Valve 2" 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
17 Screen Filter 10m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
18 Screen Filter 30m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
19 By-pass Assembly-1.5” 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
20 Venturi & Manifold2“ 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
21 Fittings/Installation & Accessories 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
 
Note: The above items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is subject to ceiling of cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 

167 
 
NEH States-Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities 3.0 ha at farmer’s field 
Annexure-XIII l 
 
SN Component Lateral to Lateral x 
Dripper spacing(mxm) 
Unit 
12x12 10x10 
9x9 
8x8 
6x6 5x5 
4x4 
3x3 
2.5x2.5 2x2 
1.5x1.5 2.5x0.6 
1.8x0.6 1.5 X 0.6 
1.2x0.6 
1 
HDPEPipe90mm;4 kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
105 
105 
105 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
HDPEPipe75mm;4 kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
240 240 
240 
240 
144 
144 
144 
105 
105 
105 
105 
3 
HDPEPipe63mm;4 kg/cm2 
m 
240 
240 
240 
240 
380 380 
380 
380 
190 
190 
190 
150 
150 
150 
150 
4 
HDPEPipe50mm; 4kg/cm2 
m 
380 
380 
380 
380 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
200 
200 
200 
200 
5 
Lateral 16mm Class II, 2.5kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
12120 
15150 
20200 
156 
217 
260 
325 
6 
Lateral12mm, Class II ;2.5kg/cm2 
m 
2500 
3000 
3333 3750 
5000 6000 7500 10000 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
7 
Emitting Pipe 16 mm; Class II: (0.2-0.3 
mx1to 2-4lph) 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
12120 
16833 
20200 
25250 
8 
Pressure regulating Emitter/ 
Dripper2/4/ 8lph 
No. 
833 
1200 
1481 1875 
3333 3672 5738 10200 
9696 
15150 
26933 0 
0 
0 
0 
9 
Control Valve 90mm 
No 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
10 
Control Valve 75mm 
No 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
5 
5 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
11 
Control Valve 63mm 
No. 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
2 
2 
2 
2 
12 
Control Valve 50mm 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
8 
8 
8 
8 
13 
Flush Valve75mm 
No. 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
5 
5 
5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
14 
Flush Valve63mm 
No. 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
1 
1 
1 
1 
15 
Flush Valve50mm 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
4 
4 
4 
16 
AirReleaseValve1” 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
17 
Non Return Valve 1.5” 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
18 
Non Return Valve 2” 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
19 
Throttle Valve1.5” 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
20 
Throttle Valve2” 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
21 
Screen Filter 30m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
22 
Screen Filter 20/25m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
23 
Screen Filter 10m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
24 
By-pass Assembly-2” 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
25 
Venturi & Manifold2“ 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
26 
Fittings/Installation & Accessories 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
 
Note: The above items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is subject to ceiling of cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 

168 
 
 
NEH States-Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities 4.0 ha at farmer’s field 
Annexure-XIII m 
 
Note: 
The 
above 
items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is subject to ceiling of cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 
SN. Component Lateral to Lateral x 
Dripper spacing(mxm) 
Unit 12x12 10x10 9x9 
8x8 
6x6 
5x5 
4x4 
3x3 
2.5x2.5 
2x2 
1.5x1.5 
2.5x0.6 
1.8x0.6 1.5X0.6 
1.2x0.6 
1 
HDPE Pipe 90mm; 4kg/cm 2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
160 
160 
160 
150 
150 
150 
150 
2 
HDPE Pipe 75mm; 4kg/cm 2 
m 
245 
245 
245 
245 
245 
245 
245 
245 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
3 
HDPE Pipe 63mm; 4kg/cm 2 
m 
275 
275 
275 
275 
275 
275 
275 
275 
275 
275 
275 
275 
275 
275 
275 
4 
HDPE Pipe50mm;4kg/cm2 
m 
167 
167 
167 
167 
167 
167 
167 
167 
167 
167 
167 
167 
167 
167 
167 
5 
Lateral 16mm Class II,2.5kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
16160 
20200 
26933 
180 
250 
300 
375 
6 
Emitting Pipe16mm;Class II:(0.2- 
0.3mx1 to2-4 lph) 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
16000 
22000 26670 
33100 
7 
Lateral 12mm, Class II ;2.5kg/cm2 
m 
3400 
4080 
4533 
5100 
6800 
8160 
10200 13600 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
8 
Pressure regulating Emitter/ 
Dripper2/4/ 8lph 
No. 1133 
1632 
2015 
2550 
4533 
4896 
7700 
13600 
12800 
20000 
35911 
0 
0 
0 
0 
9 
Control Valve 90mm 
No. 0 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
10 Control Valve 75mm 
No. 0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2 
2 
2 
11 Control Valve63mm 
No. 5 
5 
5 
5 
3 
3 
3 
3 
8 
8 
8 
5 
5 
5 
5 
12 Control Valve50mm 
No. 3 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2 
2 
2 
4 
4 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
13 Flush Valve75mm 
No. 3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
1 
1 
1 
1 
14 Flush Valve63mm 
No. 5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
4 
4 
4 
4 
15 Flush Valve50mm 
No. 3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2 
2 
2 
16 Air Release Valve1.5” 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
17 Non Return Valve1.5” 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
18 Non Return Valve2” 
No. 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
19 Non Return Valve2.5” 
No. 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
20 Throttle Valve 1.5” 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
21 Throttle Valve 2” 
No. 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
22 Throttle Valve 2.5” 
No. 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
23 Screen Filter30m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
24 Screen Filter20/25m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
25 Screen Filter10m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
26 By-pass Assembly-2” 
No. 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
27 By-pass Assembly-1.5” 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
28 Venturi & Manifold2“ 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
29 Fittings/Installation & Accessories 
5% 5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 

169 
 
Annexure-XIII n 
 
NEH States-Drip Irrigation Technology-Indicative Bill of Quantities 5.0 ha at farmer’s field 
 
SN Component Lateral to Lateral x 
Dripper spacing(mxm) 
Unit 12x12 
10x10 
9x9 
8x8 
6x6 
5x5 
4x4 
3x3 
2.5x2.5 
2x2 
1.5x1.5 
2.5x0.6 1.8x0.6 
1.5X0.6 
1.2x0.6 
1 
HDPE Pipe 90mm; 4kg/cm2 
m 
124 
124 
124 
124 
124 
124 
124 
124 
180 
180 
180 
180 
180 
180 
180 
2 
HDPE Pipe 75mm; 4kg/cm2 
m 
180 
180 
180 
180 
180 
180 
180 
180 
372 
372 
372 
375 
375 
375 
375 
3 
HDPE Pipe 63mm; 4kg/cm2 
m 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
300 
310 
310 
310 
310 
4 
HDPE Pipe50mm;4kg/cm2 
m 
212 
212 
212 
212 
212 
212 
212 
212 
212 
212 
212 
200 
200 
200 
200 
5 
Lateral 16mmClassII,2.5kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
20200 
25250 
33667 
268 
373 
447 
559 
6 
EmittingPipe16mm;Class II:(0.2- 
0.3mx1 to2-4 lph) 
m 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
20200 
28056 
33667 
42083 
7 
Lateral12mm, Class II ;2.5kg/cm2 
m 
4250 
5100 
5667 
6375 
8500 
10200 12750 17000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
8 
Pressure regulating Emitter/ 
Dripper2/4/ 8lph 
No. 
1417 
2040 
2519 
3188 
5667 
6120 
9563 
17000 
16610 
25250 
44889 
0 
0 
0 
0 
9 
Control Valve 90mm 
No. 
2 
2 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
2 
2 
10 
Control Valve 75mm 
No. 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
2 
2 
2 
2 
11 
Control Valve 63mm 
No. 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
12 
Control Valve 50mm 
No. 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
13 
Flush Valve75mm 
No. 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
14 
Flush Valve63mm 
No. 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
15 
Flush Valve50mm 
No. 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
16 
Air Release Valve 1.5” 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
17 
Non Return Valve 1.5” 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
18 
Non Return Valve 2.5” 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
19 
Throttle Valve1.5” 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
20 
Throttle Valve2” 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
21 
Throttle Valve2.5” 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
22 
Screen Filter 30m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
23 
Screen Filter 20/25m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
24 
Screen Filter 10m3/hr/Disc filter 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
25 
By-pass Assembly-2.5” 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
26 
By-pass Assembly-2” 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
27 
Venturi & Manifold2“ 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
28 
Fittings/Installation & Accessories 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Note: The above items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is subject to ceiling of cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 

170 
 
Annexure-XIV 
Indicative Bill of Quantities (BoQ) for Portable Sprinkler Irrigation System 
 
 
Using 63 mm coupler 
SN 
Components/Area(Ha) 
Unit 
0.4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
HDPE Pipes with Quick coupled (Pipe of Class 
II;3.2kg/cm2 IS:17425:202063 mm diameter & 6m long) 
No 
18 
30 
41 
NA 
NA 
NA 
2 
Quick coupled HDPE 63mm Foot batten Assembly; 
No 
3 
5 
9 
NA 
NA 
NA 
3 
GI/PP/PVC Riser Pipe3/4"diameterx75cm long 
No 
3 
5 
9 
NA 
NA 
NA 
4 
Sprinkler Nozzles(1.7to2.8kg/cm2);IS12232 Part I 
Brass/Plastic 
No 
3 
5 
9 
NA 
NA 
NA 
5 
Quick coupled HDPE Bend with Coupler 900(63/50mm); 
No 
1 
1 
1 
NA 
NA 
NA 
6 
Quick coupled HDPE Pump Connecting Nipple 63mm; 
No 
1 
1 
1 
NA 
NA 
NA 
7 
Quick coupled HDPE End Plug (63mm); 
No 
1 
2 
2 
NA 
NA 
NA 
8 
Quick coupled HDPE Tee with Coupler(63mm); 
No 
1 
1 
1 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Using 75mm coupler 
SN 
Components/Area(Ha) 
Unit 
0.4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
HDPE Pipes with Quick coupled (Pipe of Class 
I;2.5kg/cm2 IS:17425:2020, 75mm diameter & 6m long) 
No 
NA 
30 
41 
NA 
NA 
NA 
2 
Quick coupled HDPE 75mm Foot batten Assembly; 
No 
NA 
5 
9 
NA 
NA 
NA 
3 
GI/PP/PVC Riser Pipe3/4"diameter x75cm long 
No 
NA 
5 
9 
NA 
NA 
NA 
4 
Sprinkler Nozzles (1.7to2.8kg/cm2); IS12232 Part I 
Brass/Plastic 
No 
NA 
5 
9 
NA 
NA 
NA 
5 
Quick coupled HDPE Bend with Coupler 900(75mm); 
No 
NA 
1 
1 
NA 
NA 
NA 
6 
Quick coupled HDPE Pump Connecting Nipple, 75mm; 
No 
NA 
1 
1 
NA 
NA 
NA 
7 
Quick coupled HDPE End Plug (75mm); 
No 
NA 
2 
2 
NA 
NA 
NA 
8 
Quick coupled HDPE Tee with Coupler(75mm); 
No 
NA 
1 
1 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Using 90mm coupler 
SN 
Components/Area(Ha) 
Unit 
0.4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
HDPE Pipes with Quick coupled (Pipe of Class 
I;2.5kg/cm2; IS:17425:2020, 90mm diameter & 6m 
long) 
No 
NA 
NA 
NA 
41 
52 
58 
2 
Quick coupled HDPE 90mm Foot batten Assembly; 
No 
NA 
NA 
NA 
11 
14 
16 
3 
GI/PP/PVC Riser Pipe3/4" diameterx75cm long 
No 
NA 
NA 
NA 
11 
14 
16 
4 
Sprinkler Nozzles (1.7to2.8kg/cm2);IS12232Part I 
Brass/Plastic 
No 
NA 
NA 
NA 
11 
14 
16 
5 
Quick coupled HDPE Bend with Coupler 900(90mm); 
No 
NA 
NA 
NA 
2 
2 
4 
6 
Quick coupled HDPE Pump Connecting Nipple, 90mm; 
No 
NA 
NA 
NA 
1 
1 
1 
7 
Quick coupled HDPE End Plug(90mm); 
No 
NA 
NA 
NA 
2 
2 
2 
8 
Quick coupled HDPE Tee with Coupler(90mm); 
No 
NA 
NA 
NA 
1 
1 
2 
 
Note: In the cases of area upto 2ha, the beneficiary may be allowed for using higher dia HDPE pipe as per his choice. However, financial 
assistance may be allowed as per the indicative Unit cost for 75 mm dia HDPE pipe. 

171 
 
Annexure-XV 
Indicative Bill of Quantities (BoQ) for Micro Sprinkler Irrigation System 
 
SN 
Components/Area(Ha) 
5mx5m 
3mx3m 
Unit 0.4 1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
4.0 
5.0 
0.4 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
4.0 
5.0 
1 
PVCPipe90mm,class-II;4kg/cm2 
m 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
160 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
150 
2 
PVCPipe75mm,class-II;4kg/cm2 
m 30 
54 
80 
100 
252 
600 
30 
54 
100 
140 
220 
520 
3 
PVCPipe63mm,class-II;4kg/cm2 
m 66 
102 
150 
180 
402 
0 
66 
102 
150 
180 
380 
0 
4 
20mmLLDPEplainlaterals,ClassII;2.5 
kg/cm2 
m 0 
2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 0 
3350 6660 10000 13330 16600 
5 
Lateral16mm,ClassII;2.5kg/cm2 
m 800 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1336 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
6 
Micro sprinkler Set 
No. 160 400 
800 1200 1600 
2000 444 
1111 2222 
3333 
4444 
5556 
7 
ControlValve90mm 
No. 0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
8 
ControlValve75mm 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
4 
9 
ControlValve63mm 
No. 1 
1 
4 
4 
0 
0 
1 
1 
4 
4 
0 
0 
10 FlushValve75mm 
No. 0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
6 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
4 
11 FlushValve63mm 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
12 FlushValve50mm 
No. 2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
13 AirreleaseValve-1" 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
14 NonReturnValve-2" 
No. 1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
15 NonReturnValve-2.5" 
No. 0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
16 ThrottleValve-2" 
No. 1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
17 ThrottleValve-2.5" 
No. 0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
18 Screenfilter30m3/hr 
No. 0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
19 Screenfilter20/25m3/hr 
No. 1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
20 By-passAssembly-2.5"x2" 
No. 0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
21 By-passAssembly-2"x1,5" 
No. 1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
22 Venturi&manifold-2" 
No. 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
23 Fittings/Installation & Accessories 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Note: The above items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is subject to ceiling of 
cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 

172 
 
Annexure-XVI 
Indicative Bill of Quantities (BoQ) for Mini Sprinkler Irrigation System 
SN 
Components/Area(Ha) 
Unit 
10x10 
8x8 
0.4 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
4.0 
5.0 0.4 1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
4.0 5.0 
1 
PVCPipe90mm,class-II;4kg/cm2 
m 
0 
0 
80 
210 
235 
310 0 
0 
80 
210 
235 310 
2 
PVCPipe75mm,class-II;4kg/cm2 
m 30 
60 
150 
320 
420 
480 30 
60 
150 
320 
420 480 
3 
PVCPipe63mm,class-II;4kg/cm2 
m 66 
110 
0 
0 
0 
0 66 
110 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
25/32mmLLDPEplainlaterals,2.5kg/cm2-
ClassII 
m 400 
1000 2000 
3000 4000 5000 500 1250 2500 3750 
5000 6250 
5 
Mini Sprinkler Head/Nozzle 
No. 40 
100 
220 
300 
400 
500 63 
156 
312 
470 
625 780 
6 
Riser Assembly(MS/Plastic) 
No. 40 
100 
220 
300 
400 
500 63 
156 
313 
470 
625 781 
7 
ControlValve90mm 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
8 
ControlValve75mm 
No. 
0 
1 
1 
1 
4 
4 0 
1 
2 
4 
4 
4 
9 
ControlValve63mm 
No. 
1 
1 
2 
0 
0 
0 1 
1 
2 
0 
0 
0 
10 ControlValve32mm 
No. 
0 
20 
34 
52 
68 
84 0 
24 
36 
54 
72 
90 
11 FlushValve75mm 
No. 
0 
0 
1 
4 
4 
4 0 
1 
2 
4 
4 
4 
12 FlushValve63mm 
No. 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
13 AirreleaseValve-1" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
14 NonReturnValve-2.5" 
No. 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
15 NonReturnValve-2" 
No. 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
16 ThrottleValve3" 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
17 ThrottleValve-2.5" 
No. 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
18 ThrottleValve-2" 
No. 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
19 Screenfilter30m3/hr 
No. 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
20 Screenfilter20/25m3/hr 
No. 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
21 By-passAssembly-2"x1,5" 
No. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
22 By-passAssembly-1.5"x1.5" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
23 Venturi&manifold-2" 
No. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
24 Fittings/Installation & Accessories 
5% 5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 5% 5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 5% 
Note: Installation of PVC or HDPE pipes for main/sub mains may be the choice of beneficiary. However, financial assistance will be limited to the PVC pipe and 
differential amount to be borne by beneficiary. 

173 
 
Annexure-XVII 
Indicative Bill of Quantities (BoQ) for Semi Permanent Sprinkler Irrigation System 
SN 
Particulars/ha area 
0.4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
PVC Pipe90mm,class-II;4kg/cm2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
173 
2 
PVC Pipe75mm,class-II;4kg/cm2 
0 
0 
110 
135 
156 
0 
3 
PVC Pipe63mm,class-II;4kg/cm2 
96 
154 
273 
340 
395 
440 
4 
PVC Pipe25mm Class-V;10Kg/cm2 
350 
950 
1904 
0 
0 
0 
5 
32mm LLDPE plain laterals,2.5 
kg/cm2-ClassII 
0 
0 
0 
3006 
4000 
5014 
6 
Control Valve 63mm 
1 
1 
2 
2 
2 
2 
7 
By-pass Assembly-2.5"x2" 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
8 
Control Valve 25mm 
12 
20 
42 
51 
80 
88 
9 
Sprinkler Nozzles (1.7to2.8kg/cm2);IS12232 Part I 
Brass/Plastic 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
10 
Screenfilter20/25m3/hr 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
11 
Fittings/Installation & Accessories 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Note: The above items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is 
subject to ceiling of cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 

174 
 
 
Annexure-XVIII 
Indicative Bill of Quantities (BoQ) for Rain-gun Sprinkler Irrigation System 
 
Using 63 mm coupler 
SN 
Components/Area(ha) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
HDPE Pipes with Quick coupled(Pipe of Class 3;4kg/cm2 IS:17425:202063 mm 
diameter & 6m long) 
30 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
2 
Raingun Sprinkler1.25"female threaded connection 
1 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
3 
Tripod Stand with adapter to feederline1.25"x1.5m 
1 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
4 
Quick coupled HDPE Bend with Coupler 900(63/50mm); 
1 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
5 
Quick coupled HDPE Pump Connecting Nipple 63mm; 
1 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
6 
Quick coupled HDPE End Plug(63mm); 
1 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
7 
Quick coupled HDPE Tee with Coupler (63mm); 
1 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
8 
Screenfilter20/25m3/hr 
1 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
9 
By-pass Assembly-2"x1,5" 
1 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
Using75mmcoupler 
SN 
Components/Area(ha) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
HDPEPipeswithQuickcoupled(PipeofClass3;4kg/cm2IS:17425:202075mmdiam
eter &6mlong) 
30 
42 
NA 
NA 
NA 
2 
RaingunSprinkler1.25"femalethreadedconnection 
1 
1 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
3 
TripodStandwithadaptertofeederline1.25"x1.5m 
1 
1 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
4 
Quick coupled HDPE Bend with Coupler 900(75mm); 
1 
1 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
5 
Quick coupled HDPE Pump Connecting Nipple,75mm; 
1 
1 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
6 
Quick coupled HDPE End Plug (75mm); 
1 
1 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
7 
Quick coupled HDPE Tee with Coupler(75mm); 
1 
1 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
8 
Screenfilter20/25m3/hr 
1 
1 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
9 
By-passAssembly-2"x1,5" 
1 
1 
N.A 
N.A 
N.A 
Using90mmcoupler 
SN 
Components/Area(ha) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
HDPE Pipes with Quick coupled (Pipe of Class3;4kg/cm2 IS:17425:202090mm 
diameter  &6mlong) 
NA 
NA 
45 
52 
60 
2 
Raingun Sprinkler1.5"female threaded connection 
N.A 
N.A 
1 
1 
1 
3 
Tripod Stand with adapter to feederline1.5"x1.5m 
N.A 
N.A 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Quick coupled HDPE Bend with Coupler 900(90mm); 
N.A 
N.A 
1 
1 
1 
5 
Quick coupledHDPEPumpConnectingNipple,90mm; 
N.A 
N.A 
1 
1 
1 
6 
Quick coupled HDPE End Plug(90mm); 
N.A 
N.A 
1 
1 
1 
7 
Quick coupled HDPE Tee with Coupler(90mm); 
N.A 
N.A 
1 
1 
1 
8 
Screenfilter30m3/hr 
N.A 
N.A 
0 
1 
1 
9 
Screenfilter20/25m3/hr 
N.A 
N.A 
1 
0 
0 
10 
By-passAssembly-2"x1,5" 
N.A 
N.A 
1 
0 
0 
11 
By-passAssembly-2.5"x2" 
N.A 
N.A 
0 
1 
1 
Note: The above items/components are indicative for calculation of subsidy. Deviation if any, from the above items/components is subject 
to ceiling of cost and differential amount to be borne by the beneficiary. 

175 
 
Annexure-XIX 
Water Quality Criteria in Relation to Clogging 
The criteria for water quality for conventional irrigation is different from the one meant for irrigating through drip. The 
clogging hazard with different water qualities are presented below: 
Extent of Clogging on the Basis of Quality of Irrigation Water 
 
Quality of Water 
Clogging Hazard 
Slight 
Moderate 
Severe 
Suspended Solids(ppm) 
<50 
50-100 
>100 
pH 
<7.0 
7.0-8.0 
>8.0 
TDS(ppm) 
<500 
500-2000 
>2000 
Manganese(ppm) 
<0.1 
0.1-1.5 
>1.5 
Iron(ppm) 
<0.1 
0.1-1.5 
>1.5 
Calcium and Magnesium 
(ppm) 
<20 
20-40 
>40 
Hydrogen sulphide (ppm) 
<0.5 
0.5-2.0 
>2.0 
Bacterial population(No./ml) 
<10000 
10000-50000 
>50000 
 
Source: Dasberg and Dani,1999 

176 
 
Annexure-XX 
Guidelines for Selection of Filter 
 
Water Quality 
Type of Filter 
Remarks 
Good without any physical 
and biological impurities. 
Screen 
Screen filter shall be suggested 
only if the physical impurity do not 
call for cleaning of filter element 
more than once a 
Day 
Water 
sources 
with 
heavy 
physical 
and 
biological 
impurities. 
Only screen filter will not be 
sufficient 
Additional 
filter 
is 
required 
depending upon the type of water 
impurity 
Water sources with sand and 
other heavier particles. 
Hydro cyclone Separator or 
Hydro cyclone of matching 
Flow capacity. 
Disc/Screen Filter shall be 
provided after hydro cyclone 
Water 
sources with heavy
 
of 
Biological 
Impurities such as Algae, trash 
and other debris. 
Media/sand filter 
Disc/screen filter should be 
provided after Media filter 
Water sources with heavy 
Sand and other biological 
Impurities such as Algae and 
trash. 
Combination of Hydro 
Cyclone followed by a 
Sand Filter 
Screen/disc filter should be 
After sand filter 

177 
 
Annexure- XXI 
Indicative Price of Optional Components 
 
SN 
Optional Component 
Appr. 
Price 
(Rs) 
1 
Sand Filter with back wash assembly IS1 4606 
a 
10m3/hr x1.5” 
9775 
b 
20m3/hr x2” 
13225 
c 
25m3/hr x2” 
16100 
d 
30m3/hr x2.5” 
18400 
2 
Hydrocyclone Filter IS14743 
a 
20m3/hr x2” 
4025 
b 
25m3/hr x2” 
4600 
c 
30m3/hr x2.5” 
6325 
3 
Fertilizer Tank with Assembly IS14483-PartIII 
a 
30litres 
3220 
b 
60litres 
5750 
4 
Winder 
Drip Line Winder 
2000 

178 
 
Annexure- XXII 
 
Other Interventions to be provided as optional, if and only if a farmer opted to install micro-irrigation 
System in his/her field 
 
SN 
Activities 
Cost Norms 
1 
Water harvesting system for individuals 
50%of cost (Construction cost-Rs. 
125 for plain/ Rs. 150 per cum for hilly areas) 
limited to Rs. 75000 for plain areas and Rs. 
90000 for hilly areas including lining. For 
smaller size of the ponds/dug wells, cost 
admissible on prorate basis. Cost for non-lined 
ponds/tanks will be 30% less. 
2 
Construction of Tube  wells/ Bore 
wells(Shallow/ Medium) only in areas which are 
not categorized under over- 
exploited, critical & semi-critical zones by Central 
Ground Water Board. 
50%of the total cost of installation limited to 
Rs.25,000/-per unit 
3 
Restoration/Renovation of small tank 
50% of the cost of renovation limited to 
Rs.15,000/-per unit 
4 
Recharge of defunct bore well 
50% of the cost of recharging limited to 
Rs.5000/-per unit 
5 
Pipe/pre-cast distribution 
system 
50% of the cost of system limited to Rs. 
10,000/-per ha 
6 
Water Lifting Devices (Electric, Diesel, 
wind/Solar) 
50%of the cost of installation limited to 
Rs.15,000/-per electric/diesel unit and Rs. 
50,000/-per solar/wind unit 
7 
Petrol Irrigation Pumps-upto15 hp 
Rs.10000/unit or 50% of the 
cost 
of 
the 
system(including 
installation)whichever is less. 

179 
 
Annexure-XXIII 

180 
 
 
 
 
 

181 
 
 
 
 
 

182 
 
 
 
 
 

183 
 
Annexure-XXIV 
List of BIS Standards 
 
SN 
Component Description 
BIS 
1 
Polyethylene pipes for Irrigation-Laterals with amendment 
number6 
IS12786:1989(reaffirmed2009) 
2 
Irrigation Equipment-Emitters-Specification 
IS13487:1992(reaffirmed2009) 
3 
Irrigation Equipment-Emitting pipes system-
Specification(first revision) 
IS13488:2008(reaffirmed2014) 
4 
Irrigation Equipment-Strainer type filters Specification 
(first revision) 
IS12785:1994(reaffirmed2011) 
5 
Irrigation equipment rotating sprinkler Part I, Design and 
Operational requirements (1strevision) 
IS12232(PartI)-1996(reaffirmed 
2011) 
6 
Irrigation equipment rotating sprinkler Part2, Test method for 
uniformity of distribution (1strevision) 
IS12232(Part2)-1995(reaffirmed 
2011) 
7 
Fertilizer and Chemicals Injection system Part IV enturi 
Injector 
IS14483(Part1)1997(reaffirmed 
2009) 
8 
Irrigation Equipment-Media Filters-Specification 
IS14606:2022 
9 
Irrigation Equipment-Hydro cyclone filter-Specification 
IS14743:1999(reaffirmed2009) 
10 
Un plasticized PVC pipes for agriculture-Specifications 
IS4985–2021TYPEB 
11 
Irrigation Equipment–Quick Coupled Polyethylene Pipes and 
Fittings for 
Sprinkler Irrigation Systems. 
IS17425:2020 
12 
High Density Polyethylene Pipes for water supply-
Specification (fourth revision) 
IS4984:2016 
13 
Fertilizer & Chemical Injector System-Part 2 Water Driven 
Chemical Injector Pump 
IS:14483Part2–2002 
14 
Fertilizer & Chemical Injector System-Part 3 Fertilizer Tank 
IS:14483Part3–2018 
15 
Irrigation equipments-Micro sprayers-Specifications 
IS:14605:1998 
16 
Agricultural Irrigation equipment-Manually operated 
serviceable plastic valves-Specifications 
IS:18286:2023 
17 
Injection Moulded PVC Socket Fittings with solvent Cement 
Joints 
IS:7834:1987(Part1toPart7) 
18 
Fabricated PVC-U fittings 
IS:10124:2009(Part1toPart13) 
19 
Injection moulded/machined polyethylene fittings 
IS:8008:2022 
20 
Fabricated Polyethylene fittings 
IS:8360:2022 
Source: Online catalogue of Bureau of Indian Standards 

184 
 
 
 
 
LAYOUT DESIGN OF DRIP & SPRINKLER IRRIGATION SYSTEMS 
 
 

185 
 
Annexure-XXV 
 
Pattern of Assistance and Maximum Permissible Subsidy 
 
Type of Agricultural Machinery  
For SC, ST, Small  & Marginal 
farmers, Women and NE States 
beneficiary 
For other beneficiary 
Maximum 
Permissible subsidy 
per Machine/ 
Equipment per 
beneficiary  (Rs in 
Lakhs) 
Pattern of 
Assistance 
Maximum 
Permissible 
subsidy per 
Machine/ 
Equipment per 
beneficiary  
(Rs. in Lakhs) 
Pattern of 
Assistance 
Tractors 
 
(i) 
Tractor 2WD (up to 20 PTO HP) 
2.00  
50% 
1.60 
40% 
(ii) Tractor 4WD (up to 20 PTO HP) 
2.45 
50% 
1.96 
40% 
(iii) Tractor 2WD (above 20 PTO HP and 
up to 40 PTO HP) 
3.00 
50% 
2.4 
40% 
(iv) Tractor 4WD (above 20 PTO HP and 
up to 40 PTO HP) 
3.60 
50% 
2.88 
40% 
(v) Tractor 2WD (above 40 PTO HP and 
up to 50 PTO HP) 
4.50 
50% 
3.60 
40% 
(vi) Tractor 4WD (above 40 PTO HP and 
up to 50 PTO HP) 
5.45 
50% 
4.36 
40% 
(vii) Tractor  2 WD (Above 50 PTO HP) 
6.00 
50% 
4.80 
40% 
(viii) Tractor  2 WD (Above 50 PTO HP) 
6.50 
50% 
5.20 
40% 
Power Tillers 
 
(i) Power Tiller (8 BHP and up to 11 BHP) 
1.00  
50% 
0.80 
40% 
(ii) Power Tiller (Above 11 BHP) 
1.20  
50% 
1.00  
40% 
Combine Harvesters 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Combine Harvester (self-propelled)  
9.60  
50% 
7.68  
40% 
(ii)     Combine Harvester -Tractor powered 
(without tractor) 
3.60  
50% 
2.88  
40% 
(iii)     Combine Harvester -Tractor powered 
(with tractor) 
8.70  
50% 
6.96  
40% 
(iv)     Combine Harvester-Chopper-
Collector – Tractor Mounted (without 
tractor) 
4.00  
50% 
3.20  
40% 
(v)     Combine Harvester-Chopper-
Collector – Tractor Mounted (with 
tractor) 
7.75  
50% 
6.20  
40% 
(vi)     Combine Harvester (Track Type)- <6 
feet cutter bar width  
8.40 
 
50% 
6.72  
40% 
(vii) 
Combine Harvester (Track Type) - > 
6 feet cutter bar width)  
12.50  
50% 
10.00  
40% 
(viii) Combine harvester (Tractor 
Operated) for potato, groundnut, and 
other tuber crops  
12.00  
50% 
9.60  
40% 

186 
 
(ix) 
Sugarcane harvester (Self Propelled) 
–Wheel type/Track type (Full/Half) 
(To be procured by the Custom 
Hiring Centres only) 
50.00  
50% 
 40.00  
40% 
(x) 
Maize Combine Harvester (Self-
propelled) 
12.00 
50% 
9.60  
40% 
Kisan Drone -  
5.00 
50% 
4.00  
40% 
Rice/Paddy Transplanter 
 
(i) 
Self-Propelled Rice Transplanter – 
walk behind type (4 rows) 
1.70  
50% 
1.36  
40% 
(ii) 
Self-Propelled Rice Transplanter- 4 
rows and up to 8 rows including 
riding type 
6.00  
50% 
4.80  
40% 
(iii) 
Self-Propelled Rice Transplanter- 
above 8 rows - riding type 
8.60  
50% 
6.88  
40% 
Self-Propelled Machinery 
Agricultural/Horticultural Machinery 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Crop Reaper cum Binder (3 wheel) 
1.90  
50% 
1.52  
40% 
(ii) 
Crop Reaper cum Binder (4 wheel) 
2.75  
50% 
2.20  
40% 
(iii) 
Power Weeder (engine operated 
below 2 BHP) 
0.30  
50% 
0.24  
40% 
(iv) 
Power Weeder (engine operated 2 
BHP and below 5 BHP) 
0.40   
50% 
0.32   
40% 
(v) 
Power Weeder (engine operated 5 
BHP and below 7.5 BHP) 
0.75  
50% 
0.60  
40% 
(vi) 
Power Weeder (engine operated 7.5 
BHP and above) 
0.85  
50% 
0.68  
40% 
(vii) 
Crop Reaper (Diesel/Petrol engine 
operated and Battery operated) 
0.85  
50% 
0.68  
40% 
(viii) Post Hole Digger/Auger – self 
propelled 
0.20  
50% 
0.16  
40% 
(ix) 
Pneumatic/Other planter 
1.25  
50% 
1.00  
40% 
(x) 
Areca nut climber harvester 
 0.30  
50% 
 0.24  
40% 
(xi) 
Tea leaf harvester (Hand held) 
0.11 
50% 
0.088  
40% 
(xii) 
Self-propelled 4 wheel tea leaf 
harvester  
15.00 
50% 
12.00  
40% 
(xiii) Self-Propelled Tool Bar (Ride on 
Type) 
1.55 
50% 
1.24  
40% 
(xiv) Self-Propelled electric agricultural 
Tool Bar  
1.75 
50% 
1.40  
40% 
(xi) 
Track Trolley 
2.10  
50% 
1.68  
40% 
(xii) 
 
 
 
 
 
(xiii) Nursery Media Filling Machine 
2.10  
50% 
1.68  
40% 
(xiv) Multipurpose Hydraulic System  
2.10  
50% 
 1.68  
40% 
(xv) 
Power operated horticulture tools for 
pruning, budding, grating, shearing 
etc. 
0.35  
50% 
0.28  
40% 
(xvi) Brush Cutter (Electric/Engine 
Powered) 
0.25  
50% 
0.20  
40% 
(xvii) Self-propelled Maize Harvester 
0.85  
50% 
0.68  
40% 
(xviii) Electric Tiller/Weeder 
0.63 
50% 
0.504 
40% 
(xix) Self-Propelled Forage Harvester 
 
 
 
 

187 
 
(a) Single Row 
1.50 
50% 
1.20 
40% 
(b) Two Row 
7.00 
50% 
 5.60  
40% 
(c) Four Row 
9.50 
50% 
 7.60  
40% 
Tractor/Power Tiller (below 20 BHP) 
driven equipments. 
 
 
 
 
A. Land Development, tillage and seed bed 
preparation equipments: 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
MB Plough (Single Bottom) 
0.22 
50% 
0.176 
40% 
(ii) 
MB Plough (Single Bottom-
Reversible)  
0.25 
50% 
0.20 
40% 
(iii) 
Disc Plough 
0.25 
50% 
0.20 
40% 
(iv) 
Cultivator 
0.20 
50% 
0.16 
40% 
(v) 
Harrow 
0.15 
50% 
0.12 
40% 
(vi) 
leveler Blade 
0.16 
50% 
0.128 
40% 
(vii) 
Cage wheel 
0.15 
50% 
0.12 
40% 
(viii) Furrow opener 
0.25 
50% 
0.20 
40% 
(ix) 
Ridger 
0.20 
50% 
0.16 
40% 
(x) 
Weed Slasher 
0.20 
50% 
0.16 
40% 
(xi) 
Furrow opener 
0.20 
50% 
0.16 
40% 
(xii) 
Bund former 
0.25 
50% 
0.20 
40% 
(xiii) Crust breaker 
0.10 
50% 
0.08 
40% 
(xiv) Rotopuddler 
0.13 
50% 
0.104 
40% 
(xv) 
Rotocultivator 
0.44 
50% 
0.352 
40% 
(xvi) Power Harrow 
0.45 
50% 
0.36 
40% 
(xvii) Rotavator (up to 4 ft.) 
0.45 
50% 
0.36 
40% 
(xviii) Chisel Plough 
0.15 
50% 
0.12 
40% 
B. Sowing, Planting, Reaping and Digging 
Equipments: 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Post Hole digger 
0.40 
50% 
0.32 
40% 
(ii) 
Potato Planter 
0.33 
50% 
0.264 
40% 
(iii) 
Potato Digger 
0.30 
50% 
0.24 
40% 
(iv) 
Ground nut digger 
0.18 
50% 
0.144 
40% 
(v) 
Strip till drill (5 tines) 
0.60 
50% 
0.48 
40% 
(vi) 
Tractor drawn crop reaper/ reaper 
cum binder 
0.33 
50% 
0.264 
40% 
(vii) 
Onion harvester 
0.33 
50% 
0.264 
40% 
(viii) Rice straw Chopper 
0.25 
50% 
0.20 
40% 
(ix) 
Raised Bed Planter 
0.25 
50% 
0.20 
40% 
(x) 
Sugar cane cutter/Stripper planter (5 
tines) 
0.33 
50% 
0.264 
40% 
(xi) 
Multi crop planter (5 tines) 
0.28 
50% 
0.224 
40% 
(xii) 
Ridge furrow planter 
0.23 
50% 
0.184 
40% 
(xiii) Pneumatic Planter 
0.75 
50% 
0.60 
40% 
(xiv) Pneumatic vegetable transplanter 
0.75 
50% 
0.60 
40% 
(xv) 
Pneumatic vegetable seeder 
0.75 
50% 
0.60 
40% 
(xvi) Plastic Mulch Laying Machine 
0.23 
50% 
0.184 
40% 
(xvii) Raised Bed Planter with inclined 
plate metering and shaper attachment. 
(5-7tines) 
0.43 
50% 
0.344 
40% 
(xviii) Seed treating drum 
0.17 
50% 
0.136 
40% 
(xix) Seed cum fertilizer drill(5tines) 
0.17 
50% 
0.136 
40% 

188 
 
(xx) 
Aqua ferti seed drill (5-7tines) 
0.17 
50% 
0.136 
40% 
(xxi) Lateral laying machine 
0.40 
50% 
0.32 
40% 
C. Inter Cultivation Equipments: 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Grass Weed Slasher 
0.25  
50% 
 0.20  
40% 
(ii) 
inter row cum intra row weeder 
0.18 
50% 
0.144 
40% 
D. 
Equipments 
for 
Residue 
management/Hay and Forage Equipments: 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Sugarcane thrash Cutter 
0.25 
50% 
0.20 
40% 
(ii) 
Coconut Frond Chopper 
0.30 
50% 
0.24 
40% 
(iii) 
Stubble shaver 
0.28 
50% 
0.224 
40% 
E. Harvesting & Threshing Equipments 
(Operated by engine/electric motor below 
3 hp and by power tiller, and tractor of 
below 20 BHP tractor): 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Ground Nut Pod Stripper 
0.40 
50% 
0.32 
40% 
(ii) 
Thresher 
0.38 
50% 
0.304 
40% 
(iii) 
Multi crop Threshers 
0.40 
50% 
0.32 
40% 
(iv) 
Paddy Thresher 
0.38 
50% 
0.304 
40% 
(v) 
Brush Cutter (Electric/Engine 
Powered) 
0.20 
50% 
0.16 
40% 
(vi) 
Winnowing fan 
0.30 
50% 
0.24 
40% 
(vii) 
Maize Sheller 
0.33 
50% 
0.264 
40% 
(viii) Mower 
0.30 
50% 
0.24 
40% 
(ix) 
Flail Harvester 
0.30 
50% 
0.24 
40% 
(x) 
Mower Shredder (ALL 
PURPOSE/All crops) 
0.30 
50% 
0.24 
40% 
F. Chaff Cutter (Operated by engine/electric 
motor below 3 HP and by power tiller and  
tractor of below 20 BHP tractor ) 
0.25 
 
50% 
 0.20  
 
40% 
Tractor (above 20- 35 BHP) driven 
equipments. 
 
 
 
 
A. Land Development, tillage and seed bed 
preparation equipments: 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
MB Plough (Single Bottom) 
0.35 
50% 
0.28 
40% 
(ii) 
Disc Plough 
0.25 
50% 
0.20 
40% 
(iii) 
MB Plow (Single Bottom Reversible) 
0.35 
50% 
0.28 
40% 
(iv) 
Cultivator 
0.18 
50% 
0.144 
40% 
(v) 
Harrow 
0.28 
50% 
0.224 
40% 
(vi) 
Leveler Blade 
0.18 
50% 
0.144 
40% 
(vii) 
Cage wheel 
0.18 
50% 
0.144 
40% 
(viii) Ridger 
0.15 
50% 
0.12 
40% 
(ix) 
Weed slasher 
0.23 
50% 
0.184 
40% 
(x) 
Rotopuddler 
0.63 
50% 
0.504 
40% 
(xi) 
Furrow opener 
0.18 
50% 
0.144 
40% 
(xii) 
Bund former 
0.13 
50% 
0.104 
40% 
(xiii) Crust breaker 
0.13 
50% 
0.104 
40% 
(xiv) Rotocultivator 
0.43 
50% 
0.344 
40% 
(xv) 
Power Harrow 
0.63 
50% 
0.504 
40% 
(xvi) Rotavator  up to 5 feet 
0.46 
50% 
0.368 
40% 
(xvii) Chisel Plough 
0.25 
50% 
0.20 
40% 

189 
 
(xviii) MB Plow (Two Bottom -Hydraulic 
Reversible) 
0.71 
50% 
0.568 
40% 
(xix) MB Plow (Two Bottom -Mechanical 
Reversible) 
0.40 
50% 
0.32 
40% 
(xx) 
Laser Land Leveller 
2.00 
50% 
1.60 
40% 
B. Sowing, Planting, Reaping and Digging 
Equipments: 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Post Hole digger 
0.44 
50% 
0.352 
40% 
(ii) 
Potato Planter 
0.70 
50% 
0.56 
40% 
(iii) 
Potato Digger 
0.65 
50% 
0.52 
40% 
(iv) 
Ground nut digger 
0.70 
50% 
0.56 
40% 
(v) 
Crop reaper 
0.80 
50% 
0.64 
40% 
(vi) 
Onion harvester 
0.75 
50% 
0.60 
40% 
(vii) 
Raised Bed Planter 
0.70 
50% 
0.56 
40% 
(viii) 
Sugar cane cutter/Stripper 
0.70 
50% 
0.56 
40% 
(ix) 
Multi crop planter 
0.50 
50% 
0.40 
40% 
(x) 
Ridge furrow planter 
0.45 
50% 
0.36 
40% 
(xi) 
Zero –Till Drill - Multi Crop (7 
tines) 
0.23 
50% 
0.184 
40% 
(xii) 
Seed treating drum 
0.18 
50% 
0.144 
40% 
(xiii) 
Seed cum fertilizer drill (7 tines) 
0.23 
50% 
0.184 
40% 
(xiv) 
Direct Rice Seeder (DSR- 7 tines) 
0.23 
50% 
0.184 
40% 
(xv) 
Pneumatic Planter (04 rows) 
2.00 
50% 
1.60 
40% 
(xvi) 
Pneumatic vegetable transplanter 
2.00 
50% 
1.60 
40% 
(xvii) 
Pneumatic vegetable seeder 
2.00 
50% 
1.60 
40% 
(xviii) Plastic Mulch Laying Machine 
0.50 
50% 
0.40 
40% 
(xix) 
Aqua ferti seed drill (9tines) 
0.75 
50% 
0.60 
40% 
(xx) 
Raised Bed Planter with inclined         
plate metering and shaper attachment 
0.83 
50% 
0.664 
40% 
C. Inter Cultivation Equipments: 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Grass Weed Slasher 
0.39 
50% 
0.312 
40% 
(ii) 
Inter row cum intra row weeder 
0.50 
50% 
0.40 
40% 
D. 
Equipments 
for 
Residue 
management/Hay 
and 
Forage 
and 
Transport Equipments: 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Sugarcane thrash Cutter 
0.50  
50% 
0.40  
40% 
(ii) 
Coconut Frond Chopper 
0.50 
50% 
0.40 
40% 
(iii) 
Rake (small capacity) 
1.10 
50% 
0.88 
40% 
(iv) 
Balers(Round) (up to 16 kg per 
bale) 
2.20 
50% 
1.76  
40% 
(v) 
Balers(Round) (Above 16  and up to 
25 kg per bale) 
2.40 
50% 
1.92 
40% 
(vi) 
Straw reaper 
0.75 
50% 
0.60  
40% 
(vii) 
Feed block machine(100- 200 
kg/hr) 
1.50  
50% 
0.96  
40% 
(viii) 
Stubble shaver 
0.43 
50% 
0.344  
40% 
(ix) 
Straw Chopper/Shredder/Mulcher 
Mounted type 5 ft 
0.725 
 
50% 
 
0.58 
 
40% 
(x) 
Trailer/Trolley (upto 3 Ton 
capacity) 
0.75 
50% 
0.60  
40% 
(xi) 
Trailer/Trolley (upto 5 Ton 
capacity) 
1.00 
50% 
0.80   
40% 
(xii) 
Narrow Rear Rim (one pair) for 
tractors 
0.08  
50% 
0.064   
40% 

190 
 
(xv) 
Tractor front mounted straw 
loader/grabber 
0.75 
50% 
0.60 
40% 
E. Harvesting & Threshing Equipments 
(Operated by engine/electric motor below 5 
BHP and  tractor of below 35 BHP  
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Ground Nut Pod Stripper 
0.50 
50% 
0.40 
40% 
(ii) 
Thresher 
1.00 
50% 
0.80 
40% 
(iii) 
Multi crop Threshers 
1.25 
50% 
1.00 
40% 
(iv) 
Paddy Thresher 
1.00 
50% 
0.80 
40% 
(v) 
Brush Cutter (Electric/Engine 
Powered) 
0.44 
50% 
0.352 
40% 
(vi) 
Maize Sheller  
1.00 
50% 
0.80 
40% 
(vii) 
Mower 
0.40 
50% 
0.32 
40% 
(viii) 
Flail Harvester 
0.40 
50% 
0.32 
40% 
(ix) 
Mower Shredder (ALL 
PURPOSE/All crops) 
0.75 
50% 
0.60 
40% 
(x) 
Crop Reaper cum binder (tractor 
drawn) 
1.25 
50% 
1.00 
40% 
F. Chaff Cutter (Operated by engine/electric 
motor above 3- 5 HP and by tractor of below 
35 BHP) 
0.34 
      50% 
0.272 
40% 
Tractor (above 35 BHP) driven 
equipments. 
 
A. Land Development, tillage and seed bed 
preparation equipments: 
 
(i) 
Disc Plough (3 Bottom) 
0.50 
50% 
0.40 
40% 
(ii) 
Cultivator (9-13 tines) 
0.25 
50% 
0.20 
40% 
(iii) 
Harrow – Mounted Type 
0.50 
50% 
0.40 
40% 
(iv) 
Harrow – Trailed type 
0.50 
50% 
0.40 
40% 
(v) 
Leveler Blade 
0.70 
50% 
0.56 
40% 
(vi) 
Cage wheel 
0.20 
50% 
0.16 
40% 
(vii) 
Furrow opener 
0.33 
50% 
0.264 
40% 
(viii) 
Ridger 
0.33 
50% 
0.264 
40% 
(ix) 
Laser Land Leveller  
 
6 feet 
1.35 
50% 
1.08 
40% 
7 feet 
1.40 
50% 
1.12 
40% 
8 feet 
1.45 
50% 
1.16 
40% 
9 feet 
1.60 
50% 
1.28 
40% 
10 feet 
1.70 
50% 
1.36 
40% 
Extended 7-9 feet 
1.90 
50% 
1.52 
40% 
Extended 8-10 feet 
2.00 
50% 
1.60 
40% 
(x) 
Rotavator 
 
a) 
6 feet 
0.60 
50% 
0.48  
40% 
b) 
7 feet 
0.70 
50% 
0.56  
40% 
c) 
8 feet 
0.73  
50% 
0.584  
40% 
d) 
9 feet 
0.85  
50% 
0.578  
40% 
e) 
10 feet 
0.95 
50% 
0.76 
40% 
(xi) 
Roto-puddler (7 feet) 
0.80  
50% 
0.64 
40% 
(xii) 
Roto-puddler (10 feet) 
1.00  
50% 
 0.80  
40% 
(xiii) 
Reversible Hydraulic MB plough(2 
bottom) 
0.705  
50% 
0.564  
40% 

191 
 
(xiv) 
Reversible Hydraulic MB plough(3 
bottom) 
0.915 
50% 
0.732  
40% 
(xv) 
Reversible Mechanical MB 
plough(2 bottom) 
0.36  
50% 
0.288  
40% 
(xvi) 
Reversible Mechanical MB 
plough(3 bottom) 
0.50  
50% 
0.40 
40% 
(xvii) 
Reversible Hydraulic MB  plough(4 
bottom) 
1.25  
50% 
1.00  
40% 
(xviii) Sub –Soiler 
 
Single Bottom 
0.175   
50% 
0.14  
40% 
Two Bottom 
0.30 
50% 
0.24 
40% 
Three Bottom 
0.55 
50% 
0.44 
40% 
Four Bottom 
0.75 
50% 
0.60 
40% 
(xix) 
Trench makers (PTO operated) 
2.00  
50% 
1.60  
40% 
(xx) 
Bund former (PTO operated) 
1.50 
50% 
1.20  
40% 
(xxi) 
Backhoe /Loader Dozer (Tractor 
operated) 
3.75  
50% 
3.00  
40% 
(xxii) 
Backhoe (Tractor operated) 
1.50 
50% 
1.20  
40% 
(xxiii) Bund former  
0.30  
50% 
0.24  
40% 
(xxiv) 
Crust breaker 
0.35  
50% 
0.28  
40% 
(xxv) 
Rotocultivator 
1.00  
50% 
0.80  
40% 
(xxvi) 
Power Harrow (PTO operated) 
1.35  
50% 
1.08 
40% 
(xxvii) Rotary Disc Harrow (PTO powered) 
0.75 
50% 
0.60 
40% 
(xxviii) Stone collector 
1.50 
50% 
1.20  
40% 
(xxix) 
Rotaridger  
0.75  
50% 
0.60  
40% 
(xxx) 
Check Basin Former 
0.38 
50% 
0.304 
40% 
 
 
B. Sowing, Planting, Fertigation Equipments: 
(i) 
Raised Bed Planter 
0.55   
50% 
0.44  
40% 
(ii) 
Seed cum fertilizer drill/Zero till 
Seed cum fertilizer drill/Spatial 
Zero Till Drill 
 
 
 
 
a) 
9 tines 
0.25  
50% 
0.20 
40% 
b) 
11 tines 
0.26  
50% 
0.208 
40% 
c) 
13 tines 
0.28 
50% 
0.224  
40% 
d) 
15 tines 
0.30 
50% 
0.24 
40% 
(iii) 
Direct Rice Seeder (DSR) 
 
 
 
 
a) 
9 tines 
0.45  
50% 
0.36  
40% 
b) 
11 tines 
0.48 
50% 
0.432  
40% 
c) 
13 tines 
0.50 
50% 
0.40  
40% 
(iv) 
Inclined Plate Planter with pre-
emergence herbicide strip applicator 
0.75  
50% 
0.60 
40% 
(v) 
Sugarcane settling Planter (Two 
Row) 
0.63  
50% 
0.504 
40% 
(vi) 
Post Hole digger (24 inch and 
above) 
0.75  
50% 
0.60 
40% 
(vii) 
Potato Planter (automatic) 
0.75  
50% 
0.60 
40% 

192 
 
(viii) 
Ground nut digger 
0.45  
50% 
0.36 
40% 
(ix) 
Sugarcane cutter/stripper/ planter 
0.75  
50% 
0.60 
40% 
(x) 
Zero –till multi crop planter (9 tines 
and above) 
0.53  
50% 
0.424 
40% 
(xi) 
Multi crop planter (9 tines and 
above) 
0.90  
50% 
0.72 
40% 
(xii) 
Happy/Turbo Seeder/Strip Till 
(Smart) Seeder   
 
 
 
 
(a) 
09 Tynes 
0.814 
50% 
0.651 
40% 
(b) 
10 Tynes 
0.842 
50% 
0.674 
40% 
(c) 
11 Tynes  
0.864  
50% 
0.691  
40% 
(d) 
12 Tynes 
0.902  
50% 
0.722  
40% 
(xiii) Super Seeder 
 
 
 
 
(a) 6 Feet 
1.30 
50% 
1.04  
40% 
(b) 7 Feet 
1.35 
50% 
1.08 
40% 
(c) 8 Feet 
1.42 
50% 
1.14 
40% 
(d) 9 Feet 
1.55 
50% 
1.24 
40% 
(e) 10 Feet 
1.65 
50% 
1.32 
40% 
(xiv) 
Surface Seeder 
 
 
 
 
(a) 5 Feet 
0.60 
50% 
0.48 
40% 
(b) 6 Feet 
0.68 
50% 
0.54 
40% 
(xv) 
Pneumatic Planter 
2.25 
50% 
1.80 
40% 
(xvi) 
Pneumatic, semi-automatic 
vegetable/multi-seedling 
transplanter 
2.25 
50% 
1.80 
40% 
(xvii) Pneumatic Vegetable Seeder 
2.25 
50% 
1.80 
40% 
(xviii) Cassava Planter (9 tines and 
above) 
0.75  
50% 
0.60  
40% 
(xix) 
Manure spreader 
1.50  
50% 
1.20  
40% 
(xx) 
Urea Deep Placement Applicator 
0.75  
50% 
0.60  
40% 
(xxi) 
Fertilizer Spreader – PTO 
operated 
0.40  
50% 
0.32  
40% 
(xxii) Plastic Mulch Laying Machine 
0.50  
50% 
0.40  
40% 
(xxiii) Automatic rice nursery sowing 
machinery 
1.75 
50% 
1.40  
40% 
(xxiv) Aqua ferti seed drill (9 tines and 
above) 
0.75  
50% 
0.60  
40% 
(xxv) Raised Bed Planter with inclined 
plate metering and shaper 
attachment. 
0.60 
50% 
0.48  
40% 
(xxvi) Precision Multi-crop Planters 
2.50 
50% 
2.00  
40% 
(xxvii) Precision Seed Drills 
0.80  
50% 
0.64  
40% 
(xxviii) Precision fertilizer applicators 
2.00  
50% 
1.60  
40% 
(xxix) Tractor operated seeder for mat 
type rice nursery  
1.50 
50% 
1.20  
40% 
(xxx) Power operated sugarcane sett 
cutter 
0.37 
50% 
0.296  
40% 
C. Inter Cultivation Equipments: 
 
 
 
 

193 
 
(i) Grass/ Weed Slasher, 
0.75  
50% 
0.60  
40% 
(ii) inter row cum intra row weeder 
Weeder (PTO operated) 
0.83  
 
50% 
 
0.664  
 
40% 
 
D. Harvesting & Threshing Equipments 
(Operated by engine/electric motor above 5 
hp and  tractor of above 35 BHP tractor ) 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Ground Nut Pod Stripper 
1.00  
50% 
0.80  
40% 
(ii) 
Thresher/Multi crop 
Threshers upto 4     tonne/hr. 
capacity 
1.25 
50% 
1.00  
40% 
(iii) 
Paddy Thresher 
1.40 
50% 
1.12  
40% 
(iv) 
Chaff Cutter 
1.00  
50% 
0.80 
40% 
(v) 
Maize Sheller 
1.10  
50% 
0.88  
40% 
(vi) 
Crop Reaper cum Binder 
(tractor drawn) 
1.50  
50% 
1.20  
40% 
(vii) 
Thresher/Multi crop 
Threshers above 4 tonne/hr 
capacity at least in 2 crops 
2.25  
 
50% 
 
1.80  
 
40% 
 
(viii) Infielder 
1.00  
50% 
0.80  
40% 
(ix) 
Mower 
1.00 
50% 
0.80  
40% 
(x) 
Flail Harvester 
1.25 
50% 
1.00  
40% 
(xi) 
Mower shredder (All 
Purpose/All crops 
1.25 
50% 
1.00  
40% 
(xii) 
Potato Digger 
0.75 
50% 
0.60  
40% 
(xiii) Tractor operated cassava 
harvester cum lifter 
1.00 
50% 
0.80  
40% 
(xiv) Tractor operated banana 
bunch harvester  
1.00 
50% 
0.80 
40% 
(xv) 
Motorized Harvesting 
Sickle/Machine 
0.50 
50% 
 0.40  
40% 
(xvi) Tractor drawn crop reaper 
0.75  
50% 
0.60  
40% 
(xvii) Onion harvester 
0.80 
50% 
0.64  
40% 
Equipments for Residue management/Hay 
and Forage Equipments: 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Sugarcane thrash Cutter, 
1.38 
50% 
1.104  
40% 
(ii) 
Coconut Frond Chopper, 
1.50  
50% 
 1.20  
40% 
(iii) 
Hay Rake 
 
 
 
 
(a) 6 Arms 
1.65  
50% 
1.32  
40% 
(b) 9 Arms 
2.00  
50% 
1.60 
40% 
(c) 11 Arms 
2.38 
50% 
1.904 
40% 
(iv) 
Balers 
 
 
 
 
(a) Round – Mini up to 16 kg per 
bale 
2.00 
50% 
 
1.60  
 
40% 
(b) Round – Medium –above 16 and 
up to 40 kg per bale) 
2.395 
50% 
 
 1.916  
 
40% 
(c) Round –big more than 180 kg 
per bale and up to 500 kg per bale)  
9.90 
50% 
 
7.92 
40% 

194 
 
(d) Round – more big -  above  500 
kg per bale – to be provided under 
CHCs projects only 
 
17.00 
50% 
 
13.60  
 
40% 
(e) Rectangular – up to 20 kg per 
bale 
6.60 
50% 
 
5.28 
 
40% 
(e) Rectangular – more than 200 kg 
per bale - to be provided under 
CHCs projects only 
 
17.00 
50% 
 
13.60  
 
40% 
(v) 
Silage Baler (1400-1500 Kg/hr 
capacity) 
3.75  
 
50% 
 
3.00  
 
40% 
(vi) 
Wood chippers  
1.38  
50% 
1.10  
40% 
(vii) 
Sugarcane ratoon manager 
1.25  
50% 
1.00  
40% 
(viii) Cotton stalk uprooter 
0.75  
50% 
0.60  
40% 
(ix) 
Cotton stalk shredder 
0.75  
50% 
0.60  
40% 
(x) 
Straw reaper 
1.50  
50% 
1.20  
40% 
(xi) 
Feed block machine (above 200 
kg/hr) 
3.00  
 
50% 
 
 2.40  
 
40% 
(xii) 
Stubble shaver  
0.88  
50% 
0.704  
40% 
(xiii) Straw Chopper/shredder/ Mulcher 
 
a) 
Mounted type 5 ft 
0.725 
50% 
 0.58   
40% 
b) 
Mounted type 6 ft 
0.858  
50% 
0.686   
40% 
c) 
Mounted type 7 ft 
0.902  
50% 
0.722  
40% 
d) 
Mounted type 8 ft 
0.957  
50% 
0.766  
40% 
e) 
Trailed type 
1.471  
50% 
1.179 
40% 
f) 
Trailed (Combo type) 
2.00 
50% 
 1.60  
40% 
(xvi) Super Straw Management System 
(Super SMS) 
b
h d
i h C
bi
0.597  
 
50% 
 
0.478  
 
40% 
(xviii) Shrub Master/Cutter cum spreader 
0.275  
 
50% 
 
0.220 
 
40% 
(xix) Rotary Straw Slasher 
0.275  
50% 
0.220  
40% 
(xx) 
Tractor front mounted straw 
loader/grabber 
3.05 
50% 
2.44 
40% 
(xxi) Tractor Operated Hydraulic Press 
Straw Baler 
7.00  
 
50% 
 
 5.60  
 
40% 
(xxii) Rotary Tedder/Hay Tedder (04 
Rotors) 
2.62 
50% 
 
2.10  
40% 
(xxiii) Rotary Tedder/Hay Tedder (08 
Rotors and above) 
6.00 
50% 
 
4.80  
40% 
All Manual /Animal drawn 
equipment/implements/Tools 
 
A. Land Development, tillage and 
seed bed preparation equipments: 
(i) 
MB Plow/Wedge Plough 
(ii) 
Disc Plow 
0.10  
50% 
0.08 
40% 

195 
 
(iii) 
Cultivator 
(iv) 
Harrow 
(v) 
Leveler/Planker 
(vi) 
Furrow opener 
(vii) Ridger/bund former 
(viii) Puddler 
(ix) 
Mulch laying machine 
(x) 
Digger (Turmeric/Ginger) 
B. Sowing and Planting Equipments: 
(i) 
Paddy planter 
(ii) 
Cotton Planter 
(iii) 
Seed cum fertilizer drill 
(iv) 
Raised Bed Planter 
(v) Planter/zero-till-planter for multi 
crop use 
(vi) 
Dibbler 
(vii) Equipments for raising paddy 
nursery 
(viii) Marker for SRI 
(ix) 
Seed treating drum 
(x) 
Rice-wheat seeder 
0.10 
50% 
0.08  
40% 
(xi) 
Drum Seeder (Below 4 Row) 
0.03  
50% 
0.025 
40% 
(xii) Drum Seeder (Above 4 Row) 
0.04  
50% 
0.04  
40% 
(xiii) Stubble Collector  
0.030  
50% 
0.024 
40% 
C. Harvesting & Threshing Equipments: 
(i) 
Ground Nut Pod Stripper 
(ii) 
Thresher 
(iii) 
Winnowing fan 
(iv) 
Tree climber 
(v) 
Horticulture Hand tools 
(vi) 
Maize sheller  
(vii) Feed block machine 
(viii) Spiral grader 
0.10  
50% 
0.08  
40% 
(vi)    Chaff Cutter  (up to 3 feet) 
0.06  
50% 
0.048  
40% 
(vii)   Chaff Cutter  (above 3 feet) 
0.070  
50% 
0.056 
40% 
(viii) Manual Cotton Pluckers (12 V 
battery operated) 
0.040  
50% 
0.032  
40% 
(ix) Manual Harvesting Tool (Scythe) 
0.030  
50% 
0.024  
40% 
(x) Telescopic harvesting Poles 
0.050 
50% 
 0.040  
40% 
D. Inter Cultivation Equipments: 
(i) Grass Weed Slasher, 
(ii) inter row cum intra row weeder 
(iii) Cono Weeder 
(iv) Garden Hand Tools 
0.012 
50% 
0.010  
40% 
E. Manual Battery Operated Fertilizer 
Spreader/Broadcaster (Capacity 3-5 Litre) 
0.031 
50% 
0.025   
40% 
SELF PROPELLED/OTHER POWER 
DRIVEN HORTICULTURAL 
MACHINERY 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Chain Saw /Wheel Barrow /Mango 
Grader/Planter and other suitable 
0.45 
50% 
0.36  
40% 

196 
 
self-propelled machineries and 
equipments for horticulture crops. 
Manual Horticultural equipments 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Aluminium Ladder/Ladder 
0.15  
50% 
0.12  
40% 
(ii) Aluminium Pole 
0.13  
50% 
0.104  
40% 
(iii) Plucker 
0.05  
50% 
0.04  
40% 
Post-Harvest and Value addition 
Equipments for food grains, Oilseeds and 
Horticultural Equipments 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Mini Rice Mill  
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Up to 0.5 TPH 
1.50  
50% 
1.20  
40% 
(ii) 
More than 0.5 TPH and up to 1.0 
TPH 
1.80  
50% 
1.44  
40% 
(iii) 
Above 1.0 TPH 
2.40  
50% 
1.92  
40% 
(b) 
Composite Rice Milling Plant 
consisting of cleaner cum grader, 
de-stoner, separator, polisher and 
elevator 
 
 
 
 
(i) Capacity more than 500 kg/hr and below 
1000 kg/hr 
5.40  
50% 
4.32  
40% 
(ii) Capacity - 1000 kg/hr and above 
9.60  
50% 
7.68  
40% 
(c) 
Mini Dal Mill 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Capacity less than 50 kg/hr 
1.20 
50% 
0.96  
40% 
(ii) 
Capacity -50 kg/hr and below 100 
kg/hr 
1.80  
 
50% 
1.44  
40% 
(iii) 
Capacity - 100kg/hr and below 150 
kg/hr 
2.70  
50% 
2.16 
40% 
(iv) 
Capacity -150 kg/hr and above 
3.50  
50% 
2.80 
40% 
(d) 
Millet Mill 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Capacity – 40-60 kg/hr 
0.60  
50% 
0.48  
40% 
(ii) 
Capacity – More than 60 kg/h and 
below 100 kg/hr 
0.90  
50% 
0.72  
40% 
(iii) 
Capacity 100 kg/hr and above 
5.40  
50% 
4.32  
40% 
(e) Millet Processing Plant consisting of 
Millet Mill, Cleaner cum Grader, De-
stoner and elevators 
 
 
 
 
(i) Capacity from 100 to 200 kg/hr 
5.40  
50% 
4.32  
40% 
(ii) Capacity more than 200 kg/hr 
9.60  
50% 
7.68  
40% 
(f) Multipurpose Millet Thresher 
0.30  
50% 
0.24  
40% 
(g) Double Stage Millet de-husker 
0.90  
50% 
0.72  
40% 
(h) Centrifugal de-huller for Millets 
0.72  
50% 
0.576  
40% 
(i) Double headed centrifugal de-huller 
0.45  
50% 
0.36  
40% 
(j) Millet flaking machine 
0.60  
50% 
0.48  
40% 
(k) Millet popping machine 
0.60  
50% 
0.48  
40% 
(l) Pedal operated cleaner cum grader for 
millet 
0.15  
50% 
0.12  
40% 
(m) Mini Oil Mill/Expeller with filter 
press(for all types of Horticulture/Food 
grain/oilseed crop) 
3.00 
50% 
2.40  
40% 
(n) Mini Oil Mill without filer press (for all 
types of Horticulture/Food grain/oilseed  
crop ) 
1.80  
50% 
1.44  
40% 

197 
 
(o) Pomegranate Aril Extractor 
1.80  
50% 
1.44  
40% 
(p) Custard apple pulper 
1.80  
50% 
1.44  
40% 
(q) Dehydration unit/Pricking 
Machine/Humidifier (for all types of 
Horticulture/Food grain/oilseed crop) 
1.80  
50% 
1.44  
40% 
(r) Packing Machines(for all types of 
Horticulture/Food grain/oilseed crop 
3.00  
50% 
2.40  
40% 
(s) All types of Power driven De-husker 
/sheller     /Threshers /Harvesters / De-
spiking/ Deconing Machine/Peeler/ 
Spliter /Stripper /Shredder (for all type 
of Horticulture / food grain/oil seeds 
Crops) 
0.75  
50% 
0.60  
40% 
(t) All types of Boiler/Steamer/Drier (for 
all types of Horticulture/Food 
grain/oilseed crop) 
1.00  
50% 
0.80 
40% 
(u) All types of Solar Driers (for all type of 
Horticulture / food grain/oil seeds 
Crops) with floor area of about 400 to 
1000 sq. feet. 
3.50  
50% 
2.80  
40% 
(v) All types of Washing Machines(for all 
types of Horticulture/Food grain/oilseed 
crop) 
0.60  
50% 
0.48  
40% 
(w) All types of Grinder/Pulveriser/Polisher 
(for all types of  Horticulture/Food 
grain/oilseed crop) 
0.60  
50% 
0.48  
40% 
(x) All types of Cleaner cum Grader/ 
Gradient separator /specific 
gravity   separator (for all types of 
horticulture/Food grain/oilseed crop) 
 
 
 
 
(i) Capacity less than 1 TPH 
1.50  
50% 
1.20  
40% 
(ii) capacity from 1 THP and less than 2 
TPH 
2.40 
50% 
1.92  
40% 
(iii) Capacity 2 TPH and above 
3.00  
50% 
2.40  
40% 
(y) Indented Cylinder 
 
 
 
 
(i) Capacity – less than 1 TPH 
0.72  
50% 
0.576 
40% 
(ii) Capacity –1 TPH and less than 2 
TPH 
1.02 
50% 
0.82  
40% 
(iii) Capacity –2 TPH and above 
1.74  
50% 
1.392  
40% 
(z) Air Screen Cleaner 
0.45 
50% 
0.36  
40% 
(aa) Flexible Elevator cum Conveyor 
 
 
 
 
(i) Capacity – less than 1 TPH 
1.32 
50% 
1.056  
40% 
(ii) Capacity –1 TPH and less than 2 
TPH 
1.62 
50% 
1.296  
40% 
(iii) Capacity –2 TPH and above 
2.76 
50% 
2.208  
40% 
(bb) Grain Pick up and  weighing cum 
packaging with Silo 
 
 
 
 
(i) Capacity – less than 1 TPH 
8.00 
50% 
6.40 
40% 
(ii) Capacity –1 TPH and less than 2 
TPH 
10.00 
50% 
8.00  
40% 
(iii) Capacity –2 TPH and above 
14.00 
50% 
11.20  
40% 
(cc) Broom Stick Extractor 
0.072 
50% 
0.058  
40% 
(dd) Grain Collector 
0.63 
50% 
0.504  
40% 
(ee) Flattened rice/Puffed rice making 
machine 
1.20  
50% 
0.96  
40% 

198 
 
(ff) Papad/Chips making machine 
0.90  
50% 
0.72  
40% 
(gg) Tofu/Vegan Paneer Plant 
1.08  
50% 
0.864  
40% 
(hh) Ripening Chamber for Horticultural 
Produce (1 ton capacity) 
1.20 
50% 
0.96  
40% 
(ii) Sugarcane rind removing machine foe 
juice making 
0.39 
50% 
0.312  
40% 
(jj) Pedal operated cleaner cum grader for 
millet 
0.15  
50% 
0.12  
40% 
(kk) 
Modular Onion Storage Structure (1-5 
ton capacity) 
0.15  
50% 
0.12  
40% 
(ll) 
Moringa Leaf Stripper 
0.30  
50% 
0.24  
40% 
(mm) Rope Twisting and winding equipment 
for plant fibre extract 
0.90  
50% 
0.72  
40% 
(nn) 
Multifeed Banana fibre extraction 
equipment 
1.35  
50% 
1.08  
40% 
(oo) 
Makhana Popping and Decortication 
Machine 
3.30  
50% 
2.64  
40% 
(pp) 
Automatic Wadi Making Machine 
3.30  
50% 
2.64  
40% 
(qq) 
Mechanized system for primary 
processes and roasting of raw 
makhana/Rotating open pan roasting 
machine-LPG heated 
1.02  
50% 
0.82  
40% 
(rr) 
Solar operated phase change material 
based fruits-vegetables vending 
pushcart  
1.20  
50% 
0.96  
40% 
(ss) 
Paddy mobile dryer  
9.00  
50% 
7.20  
40% 
(tt) 
Tractor PTO/Electric Motor operated 
Onion De-topper cum grader 
4.20  
50% 
3.36  
40% 
(uu) Tractor PTO/Electric Motor operated 
garlic 
(vv)  bulb breaker cum grader 
4.20  
50% 
3.36  
40% 
(ww) Tractor PTO/Electric Motor operated 
Cleaner cum grader with conveyor (for 
all millets, cereals and pulses) 
4.20  
50% 
3.36  
40% 
(xx) Cattle Dung Collector 
0.16  
50% 
0.128  
40% 
(yy) Cow dung Briquetting Machine  
0.42  
50% 
0.336  
40% 
(zz) Cow dung dewatering machine 
0.90  
50% 
0.72  
40% 
 
 
 
Plant Protection Equipments 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
Manual sprayer: 
Knapsack/foot/Battery operated 
sprayer. 
0.01  
50% 
0.008 
40% 
(ii) Solar powered Knapsack Sprayer 
0.02  
50% 
0.016  
40% 
(iii) Bullock Cart mounted solar powered 
high clearance sprayer 
0.40  
50% 
0.32 
40% 
(iv) Bullock Cart mounted air mist canopy 
sprayer 
0.48  
50% 
0.384 
40% 
(v) Powered Knapsack sprayer/Power 
Operated sprayer (capacity 8 - 12 
litres)- ≤ 0.75 hp engine) 
0.03  
50% 
0.024  
40% 

199 
 
(vi) Powered Knapsack sprayer/Power 
Operated  sprayer (capacity above 12- 
16 litres): ( > 0.75 to 1.00 hp engine) 
0.04  
50% 
0.032  
40% 
(vii) Powered Knapsack sprayer/Power 
Operated sprayer (capacity above 16 
litres ( > 1.0 hp engine) 
0.10  
50% 
0.08  
40% 
(viii) Powered Knapsack Mist blower 
sprayer cum Duster (> 1.0 hp engine) 
0.10  
50% 
0.08  
40% 
(ix) Tractor Operated Sprayer (air 
carrier/assisted) 
1.38  
50% 
1.104  
40% 
(x) Battery operated Sprayer (Boom 
Type) 
0.05  
50% 
 0.04  
40% 
(xi) Battery Operated Boom Sprayer 
(walk behind type) 
0.05  
 
50% 
 
 0.04  
40% 
 
(xii) Tractor Operated Sprayer (boom 
type) 
0.41  
50% 
 0.328  
40% 
(xiii) Eco Friendly Light Trap 
0.02  
50% 
0.016 
40% 
(xiv) Solar insect trap 
0.04  
50% 
0.032 
40% 
(xv) Tractor Operated Electrostatic 
Sprayer  
2.50 
50% 
2.00  
40% 
(xvi) Bird Scarer 
0.75 
50% 
0.60 
40% 
(xvii) Self-propelled high ground 
clearance sprayers (Boom type) 
4.00 
50% 
3.20 
40% 
(xviii) Tractor mounted precision spraying 
machines  
3.50 
50% 
2.80 
40% 
(xix) Vehicle Mounted Sprayer for locust 
Control 
2.50 
50% 
2.00 
40% 
(xx) Soil Plant Analysis Development 
(SPAD) Meter 
0.08 
50% 
0.064 
40% 
(xxi) Pseudostem injector for Banana 
0.08 
50% 
0.064 
40% 
(xxii) Tractor operated EPN/Bio agent 
applicator for sugarcane 
0.23 
50% 
0.184 
40% 
(xxiii) Power Operated Sugarcane sett 
Treatment Device (30 – 120 Litres 
capacity) 
0.30 
50% 
0.24 
40% 
Specialized Agricultural Machinery 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Solar 
operated/electric 
operated animal deterrent bioacoustics 
equipment (with solar panel) 
0.35  
50% 
0.28  
40% 
(b) 
Solar 
operated/electric 
operated 
Animal 
deterrent 
bioacoustics equipment (without solar 
panel) 
0.25  
50% 
0.20  
40% 
(c) 
Solar 
operated/electric 
operated Hydroponic machine for 
rising nursery of various crops ( below 
500 kg capacity) 
3.00  
50% 
2.40  
40% 
(d) 
Solar 
operated/electric 
operated Hydroponic machine for 
rising nursery of various crops (500 kg 
and above capacity) 
6.00  
50% 
4.80  
40% 
(e) 
Battery Operated Rubber 
Tapping Machine 
0.10 
50% 
 
0.08 
40% 

200 
 
Irrigation Equipments 
 
 
 
 
(i) Petrol/Diesel/Electric/Tractor 
PTO 
operated/ portable irrigation pumps up 
to 15 HP (with ISI/BEE labeled with 
Minimum 4 Star rated) 
0.10  
50% 
0.08  
40% 
(ii) Remote motor operators for Electric 
Pump-sets 
0.07  
50% 
0.05  
40% 
(iii) Digital 
Soil 
Moisture 
Indicator 
(DSMS)  
0.036  
50% 
 0.029  
40% 
(iv) Digital 
Soil 
Moisture 
Indicator 
(DSMS) (GSM Module) 
0.045  
50% 
0.036  
40% 
 
Note:  
 
The States will have the flexibility to add any new machine under the appropriate categories of  machines 
 
The States may make the price discovery of the machines through the process of empanelment as per relevant 
rules of GFR. The States shall ensure that the prices of the machines are reasonable and comparable with the 
open market prices. 
 
The cost subsidy applicable will be limited to the percentage of the cost of the machine fixed by the States 
through price discovery or max. permissible subsidy per machine as indicated above, whichever is lower. 
 
The maximum permissible subsidy as indicated above will be inclusive of GST. 
 
 

201 
 
Annexure-XXVI 
Procedure for Credit Linked Capital Subsidy  
 
The following is the gist of procedure to be followed:  
 
1. Advance Subsidy: The 50% eligible subsidy amount for the projects will be released as advance 
by the Implementing Agencies to the participating Financial Institutions (Banks) on submission of 
project scrutiny note cum claim form as per requirement and the norms of the interventions. The 
same would be kept in a Subsidy Reserve Fund Account of the concerned borrowers, to be adjusted 
finally against loan amount of the bank towards the end of the repayment period and life of the 
project as per the time schedule. 
 
2. Final Installment of Subsidy: the remaining 50% would be disbursed to the participating Banks 
by the Implementing Agencies after conduct of an inspection and physical verification of the 
machines and equipments by the State Level Project Sanctioning Committee and officials from 
the financing banks.   
 
3. Adjustment of Subsidy to Borrower’s Account: The subsidy released to the bank for 
individual project will be kept in a separate borrower-wise account. The adjustment of subsidy will 
be back ended. Accordingly, the full project cost including the subsidy amount, but excluding the 
margin money contribution from the beneficiary, would be disbursed as a loan by the Banks. The 
repayment schedule will be drawn on the loan amount in such a way that the total subsidy amount 
is adjusted after the full bank loan component with interest is liquidated.  
 
4. Utilization Certificate: After release of final installment of subsidy, a Utilization Certificate is 
required to be submitted by the financing Bank certifying that the full amount of subsidy received 
in respect of the project has been fully utilized (by way of crediting to the “Subsidy Reserve Fund 
Account- Borrower –wise”) and adjusted in the books of Account under the sanctioned terms and 
conditions of the project within overall guidelines of the scheme. 
 
5. No Interest is chargeable on Subsidy Portion: For the purpose of charging interest on the loan 
component, the subsidy amount would be excluded. The balance lying to the credit of the subsidy 
reserve fund account will not form part of demand and time liabilities for the purpose of SLR/CRR 
 
6. Institutional Lending: 
(a) Eligible Financial Institutions: The eligible financing institutions under the scheme may be 
(i) Commercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), State Cooperative Banks (SCBs), State 
Cooperative Agricultural and Rural Development Banks (SCARDBs), Scheduled Primary Urban 
Cooperative Banks (PUCBs), Agricultural Development Finance Companies (ADFCs) and such 
other institutions (ii) Cooperatives where they seek loan from National Cooperatives Development 
Corporation (NCDC). 
 
(b) Term Loan  
 

202 
 
For the projects, the amount as eligible as capital subsidy of the project cost can be raised as term 
loan from the financing banks. The repayment schedule will be drawn on the total loan amount 
(including subsidy) in such a way that the subsidy amount is adjusted after liquidation of the net 
bank loan (excluding subsidy). The financial institution may provide working capital separately 
for undertaking the business by the entrepreneurs. 
 
(c) Rate of interest and Scale of Financing to the ultimate borrower: As decided by the 
financing bank, as per their respective Board approved policy. 
 
(d) Security: The security will be as per norms prescribed by RBI from time to time. 
 
(e) Repayment Period: Repayment period will depend upon the cash flow and may be generally 
up to 5 years with a grace of one year. 
 
7. Procedure to be followed for sanctioning of project and release of subsidy 
 
(a) Interested beneficiaries will submit the project proposal for term loan and subsidy to Bank 
on application form as prescribed by the concerned bank along with project report and other 
documents for appraisal and sanction of loan. 
(b) Bank after appraisal and scrutiny of loan application will furnish a brief project profile-
cum-claim form for advance subsidy in the prescribed format as may be devised by the 
project sanctioning committee at the State level. The loan shall be disbursed by the Bank 
only after the project has been cleared and approved by the State level project sanctioning 
committee, which shall also have a representative of the concerned Bank. 
(c) The Implementing Agencies on the recommendation of State level project sanctioning 
committee shall release 50% of the eligible amount of subsidy as advance subsidy to the 
participating bank for keeping the same in the subsidy fund account (borrower-wise) 
(d) The participating bank shall provide eligible amount of subsidy as term loan to the 
beneficiary. The banks at their discretion may extend full project cost as term loan to the 
beneficiary.  
(e) The beneficiary will inform the Bank that the required machines and equipments have been 
acquired by the beneficiary and the State level project sanctioning committee involving the 
bank official shall conduct the physical verification of the machines and equipments. After 
inspection the Bank will submit the claim form to the Implementing Agencies for final 
subsidy. The claim form shall necessarily be enclosed with inspection report of the 
committee. The Implementing Agency shall release the final subsidy to banks which will 
be adjusted against the subsidy amount provided to the banks in advance.   
(f) Monitoring of each project will be done by Banks branches and district level officers of the 
Implementing Agencies with periodic reporting to the Implementing Agency. 
 
 

203 
 
Annexure-XXVII (A) 
LIST OF TRAINING PROGRAMMES CONDUCTED AT THE FARM MACHINERY 
TRAINING & TESTING INSTITUTES 
Sl. No. 
Name of the Course 
Duration 
Charges per 
person per 
course 
I. 
 
USER LEVEL COURSES: 
U1 
Appropriate 
Mechanization 
Technology 
for 
Energy 
Management in Agriculture 
4 weeks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FREE 
U2 
Selection, Operation, Safety and Maintenance  of Improved 
Agricultural Machinery 
6 weeks 
U3 
Operation, maintenance and Management of power tiller  
2 weeks 
U4 
Training Program on Agro Processing & value addition 
Equipments 
2 weeks 
U5 
Gender friendly Equipments for Women farmers 
3 days 
U6 
Utilization of Non-conventional Energy Sources in Agriculture. 
1 week 
U7 
Water Management Through sprinkler and drip Irrigation & 
Water saving devices. 
1 week 
U8 
Selection, Operation, and Maintenance  of Plant Protection 
Equipments 
1 week 
U9 
Selection, Operation, and Maintenance of improved Harvesting 
& Threshing machines 
2 weeks 
U10 
Selection, Operation, and Maintenance of Hand Pump 
1 week 
U 11 
Selection, operation and maintenance of agril. Machinery for 
dry land agriculture. 
2 week 
U12 
Crop Specific Machines: 
a) Package of agricultural machinery for Paddy cultivation. 
1 week each 
FREE 
b) Package of agricultural machinery for Maize cultivation. 
c) Package of agricultural machinery for Vegetable cultivation. 
d) Package of agricultural machinery for Sugarcane cultivation. 
e) Package of agricultural machinery for Horticulture    & 
Medicinal crops cultivation. 
f) Package of Agricultural machines for oil seeds & pulses  
g) Package of Agricultural machinery for forage/fodder production 
and fodder management. 
U13 
IT application in farm mechanization 
II. 
TECHNICIAN LEVEL COURSES 
A. Courses on Repair and Overhauling 
T1 
Repair and overhauling  of  Stationery engines and 
tractors   
6 weeks 
Rs. 300/- 
T2 
Repair  & overhauling of power tillers 
2 weeks 
Rs. 100/- 
T3 
Establishment and management of agricultural 
machinery repair and maintenance workshop  
4 weeks 
Rs. 200/- 
T4 
Study & Repair of Hydraulic system in Agriculture 
Machines. 
4 weeks 
Rs. 200/- 
T5 
Repair  and maintenance of Auto Electrical equipments 
and Battery re-conditioning 
3 weeks 
Rs. 150/- 
T6 
Repair, maintenance & rewinding of Electrical motors 
and submersible pumps  
3 weeks 
Rs.150/- 
T7 
Operation & maintenance of Land shaping  and 
Development machinery 
4 weeks 
Rs. 500/- 

204 
 
T8 
Repair, maintenance & overhauling of diesel pumping 
sets 
2 weeks 
Rs. 100/- 
T9 
Maintenance, repair and installation of Combine 
Harvesters and Straw Reaper. 
3 weeks 
Rs. 150/- 
B.  Earning While Learning Courses: 
 
 
TEL-1 
Repair and overhauling of Stationery engines, tractors 
and diesel pumping sets. 
6 months 
Rs. 200/- 
TEL-2 
Repair  & overhauling  of power tillers 
6 months 
Rs. 200/- 
TEL-3 
Establishment 
and 
management 
of 
agricultural 
machinery repair and  maintenance workshop    
6 months 
Rs. 200/- 
TEL-4 
Repair and maintenance of Auto Electrical equipments, 
Battery re-conditioning, Rewinding of electrical motors 
and submersible pumps. 
6 months 
Rs. 200/- 
TEL-5 
Maintenance, repair and installation of Combine 
Harvesters and Straw Reaper. 
6 months 
Rs. 200/- 
III. 
MANAGEMENT LEVEL COURSES: (for trainees sponsored by the commercial organizations / 
Banks/ Manufacturers) 
M1 
Testing  and  Evaluation  of Farm Machinery 
1 week 
Rs. 2500/- 
M2 
Agriculture Machinery Management    
1 week 
Rs. 2500/- 
M3 
Export Management of Agricultural Machinery. 
1 week 
Rs. 2500/- 
M4 
Instrumentation for Farm Machinery Testing and 
Evaluation 
1week 
Rs. 2500/-  
M5 
Entrepreneurship development to establish custom 
hiring agro-service centre 
8 weeks 
Rs. 20000/ 
(Except for 
farmers) 
 
M6 
Farm machinery management for dealers / traders/ 
manufacturers, etc. 
1week 
Rs. 2500/ 
IV 
ACADEMIC LEVEL TRAINING PROGRAM 
 
A1 
Trg. program on Farm Power & Machinery 
for Degree/Diploma Engg.Students. (4 weeks) 
4 weeks 
Rs. 2000/- 
per course 
 
A2 
Practical Training programme on Farm Power and 
Machinery for  ITI & 10 +2 vocational  students  
4 weeks 
V 
NB 
Need based Training Programme on 
Mechanization 
As per 
requirement 
of the 
Sponsoring 
agency. 
Rs. 1000/- 
per month 
(Except 
Farmers) 
VI 
FN 
Training programme for Foreign National as per 
requirements under Bilateral programme 
10 to 18 weeks 
(As per 
requirement 
of the 
Sponsoring 
agency) 
As per 
Govt. 
policy 
VII TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER CAMPS – OFF CAMPUS 
 
TT1 
Energy conservation & safety in farm machinery 
1 – 2 
days 
Free 
 
TT2 
Familiarization 
and 
demonstration 
of 
improved/modern agril. Machines. 
1 – 2 
days 
Free 
 
 
 

205 
 
Annexure-XXVII(B) 
 
Skill Development Programmes aligned to NSQF and notified by ASCI in the area of Farm 
Machinery for 12 Job Roles 
 
 Qualification Pack Title 
QP ID. 
Proposed 
NSQF 
level 
Entry 
requirements 
Total 
Hours 
 
 
 
 
 
Tractor operator 
 
AGR/Q1101 
4 
Class X 
200 
Harvesting Machine Operator 
 
AGR/Q1102 
4 
Class X 
200 
Agriculture Machinery Operator 
 
AGR/Q1103 
4 
Class 8 preferably 
200 
Agriculture Machinery Repair and 
Maintenance Service Provider 
AGR/Q1111 
5 
Class 12 
preferably 
200 
Custom Hiring Service Provider 
AGR/Q1112 
5 
Class 12 
preferably 
200 
Irrigation Service Technician 
 
AGR/Q1104 
4 
Class 8 preferably 
200 
Operator-Reaper Thresher and Crop 
Residue Machinery 
AGR/Q1105 
4 
Class 8 preferably 
220 
Service and Maintenance Technician-Farm 
Machinery 
AGR/Q1106 
4 
Class 10 
preferably 
205 
Agriculture Machinery Demonstrator 
 
AGR/Q1107 
5 
Class 10 
preferably 
200 
Tractor Mechanic 
 
AGR/Q1108 
4 
Class 10 
preferably 
220 
Farm Workshop Foreman/Supervisor 
AGR/Q1109 
5 
ITI or Class 10 
preferably 
200 
Farm Workshop/Service Manager 
AGR/Q1110 
6 
B. Tech/ B.E / 
Graduate in 
Business 
Administration 
200 
 
 
 

206 
 
Annexure-XXVIII 
 
List of institutions approved by the Department for Testing and Certifying Agricultural 
Machineries and Equipments 
 
S. No. 
Name of the State 
Name of the Institute 
1 
BIHAR 
Faculty of Agricultural Engineering, Rajendra Agriculture University, PUSA 
(BIHAR) 
2 
CHHATTISGARH 
 
State level Agriculture Implement Testing Centre,  Directorate (Agricultural 
Engineering), Agriculture Department, Govt. of Chhattisgarh, TeliBandha, Gorav 
Path, RAIPUR (CHHATTISGARH) 
3 
DELHI 
Division of Agricultural Engineering, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, NEW 
DELHI-12. 
4 
GUJARAT 
College of Agricultural Engineering & Technology, Junagarh Agricultural 
University, JUNAGARH (GUJARAT)# 
5 
HARYANA 
College of Agricultural Engineering & Technology, Chaudhary Charan Singh 
Agriculture University, HISAR (Haryana)# 
6 
CCSHAU- Regional Research Station, CCSHAU, Uchani, Karnal (Haryana) 
7 
JAMMU & 
KASHMIR 
Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agri. Science & Technology, SRINAGAR REGION 
(J. & K.)  
8 
Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agri. Science & Technology, JAMMU REGION (J. 
& K.) 
9 
JHARKHAND 
Birsa  Agriculture University, Kanke, RANCHI (JHARKHAND) 
10 
Jharkhand Agriculture Machinery Testing and Training Centre (JAM-TTC),  Govt. 
of Jharkhand, RANCHI (JHARKHAND) 
11 
KARNATAKA 
University 
of 
Agricultural 
Sciences, 
Gandhi 
Krishi 
Vignyan 
Kendra, 
BANGALORE (KARNATAKA.) 
 
12 
College of Agricultural Engineering, University of Agricultural Sciences, 
RAICHUR, KARNATAKA - 584104 
College of Agriculture Vijaypur,  University of Agricultural Sciences  Belgaum Rd, 
Krishi Nagar, Dharwad, Karnataka 580005  
13 
14 
Farm Machinery Testing Centre, College of Food Technology, University of 
Horticultural Sciences, Udyanagiri, Navanga, Bagalkot (Karnataka) - 587104 
15 
KERALA 
Farm Machinery Testing Centre, Kerala Agricultural University Kelappaji College 
of Agricultural Engineering & Technology Tavanur, Malappuram (Dist), Kerala- 
679573 
16 
MADHYA 
PRADESH 
Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Berasia Road, BHOPAL (MP) # 
17 
College of Agricultural engineering, Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi Vishvidyalaya, 
Jabalpur (Madhya Pradesh) 
18 
MAHARSHTRA 
Dr. A.S. College of   Agricultural Engineering Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, 
Rahuri,  Distt. Ahmednagar, Maharashtra (MPKV) 
19 
Farm Machinery Testing, Training and Production Centre, Department of Farm 
Power and Machinery, Dr. PDKV, Akola # 
20 
College of Agricultural Engineering and Technology, Dr. Balasaheb Sawant Konkan 
Krishi Vidyapeeth,  DAPOLI (MAHARSHTRA) 
21 
 
College of Agricultural Engineering, V. N. Marathwada Krishi Vidyapeeth, 
PARBHANI (MAHARASHTRA)-431402 
 
 
 
 
 
 

207 
 
Annexure-XXVIII (Contd.) 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of the State 
Name of the Institute 
22 
ODISHA 
College of Agricultural Engineering and Technology, Orissa University of 
Agriculture and Technology, BHUBANESWAR  
23 
 
State Level Farm Machinery Training & Testing Centre, Agriculture 
Department, Government of Odisha, Bhubaneswar, Odisha.## 
24 
PUNJAB 
College of Agricultural Engineering and Technology, Punjab Agriculture 
University, LUDHIANA (PUNJAB) 
25 
Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering and Technology (CIPHET), 
Ludhiana , 141004## 
26 
RAJASTHAN 
Farm Implements and Machinery Testing & Training Centre, Central 
Workshop, Swami Keshwanand Rajasthan Agricultural University, 
Bikaner (Rajasthan). 
27 
College of Technology and Agricultural Engineering, Maharana Pratap, 
University of Agriculture and Technology, UDAIPUR (RAJASTHAN) 
28 
SIKKIM 
 
College of Agricultural Engineering and Post-Harvest Technology,  
RANIPOOL, GANGTOK (SIKKIM) 
29 
TAMIL NADU 
Agricultural Engineering Collage & Research Institute (AEC&RI) , Tamil 
Nadu Agricultural University, Kumulur, Trichy (TAMIL  NADU) 
30 
Farm Machinery Testing Center, ICAR-Central Institute of Agricultural 
Engineering- Regional Center, near AMRC, Coimbatore -641003## 
31 
TELANGANA 
Prof. Jayashanker Telengana State Agriculture University, Hydrabad 
32 
UTTAR PRADESH 
State Level Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institute, Govt. of U.P.,  
Rehmankhera, LUCKNOW (U.P.) 
33 
Sam Higginbottom Institute of Agriculture, Technology & Science (AAI), 
Deemed University, ALLAHABAD (U.P.) 
34 
UTTARAKHAND 
College of Technology, Gobind Ballabh Pant University of Agriculture and 
Technology, PANTNAGAR (UTTARANCHAL) 
35 
WEST BENGAL 
Department of Agriculture & Food Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology, KHARAGPUR (WEST BENGAL.) 
36 
State Farm Machinery Training-cum-Testing Institute, Faculty of 
Agricultural Engineering, Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya 
(BCKVV), Mohanpur, DISTT. NADIA (WEST BENGAL) 
37 
CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute (CMERI), 
Durgapur (West Bengal) 
Note: # These designated testing Centres are also authorized to test Plant Protection Equipments 
## These testing Centres are also authorized to test post-harvest technology equipment and machines 
 
 

208 
 
Annexure-XXIX 
 
Pattern of Assistance and Maximum Permissible Subsidy for the Farmers for procurement of crop 
residue management machines on individual ownership basis 
 
S.No. 
Name of the machine/equipment 
Pattern of 
Assistance 
Maximum Permissible 
subsidy per Machine/ 
Equipment per 
beneficiary inclusive of 
GST @ 12% (Rs.) 
1.  Super Straw Management System 
(Super SMS) to be attached with 
Combine Harvester 
50% 
59,700 
2.  (a) Happy Seeder  
(b) Smart Seeder 
 
 
a) 09 tine 
50% 
81,400 
b) 10 tine 
50% 
84,150 
c) 11 tine 
50% 
86,350 
d) 12 tine 
50% 
90,200 
3.  Paddy Straw Chopper/ 
Shredder/Mulcher 
 
 
a) Mounted type (Straw Chopper & 
Mulcher) 
 
 
i) 5 ft 
50% 
72,500 
ii) 6 ft 
50% 
85,800 
iii) 7 ft 
50% 
90,200 
iv) 8 ft 
50% 
95,700 
b) Trailed type 
50% 
1,47,100 
4 
Shrub Master/Rotary Slasher  
50% 
27,500 
5. 
Hydraulic Reversible M.B. Plough 
 
 
a) Two bottom 
50% 
70,500 
b) Three bottom 
50% 
91,500 
c) Four bottom 
50% 
1,25,400 
6. 
(a) Zero Till Seed cum Fertilizer Drill 
(b) Spatial Zero Till Drill 
 
 
9 tine 
50% 
24,800 
11 tine 
50% 
28,200 
13 tine 
50% 
30,800 
15 tine 
50% 
33,000 
7. 
Super Seeder  
50% 
1,20,000 
8. 
Surface Seeder 
50% 
44,000 
9. 
Baling Machines  
 
 
Balers (Round – Mini – upto 16kg per 
bale) 
50% 
2,20,000 
Balers (Round – Medium –above 16-25 
kg per bale) 
50% 
2,39,500 
Balers (Round –big-180-200 kg per bale) 
50% 
9,90,000 
Baler (Rectangular 18-20 kg per bale)  
50% 
6,60,000 
Straw Rake 
50% 
1,65,000 

209 
 
10. 
Crop Reaper 
 
 
(a) Tractor mounted 
50% 
82,500 
(b) Self-Propelled 
50% 
90,000 
Self-Propelled reaper cum Binder (3 
wheel) 
50% 
1,92,500 
Self-Propelled reaper cum Binder (4 
wheel) 
50% 
2,60,000 
Note: 
 
(a) The financial assistance will be limited to 50% of the cost of the machine or the maximum permissible 
subsidy per machine as indicated above, whichever is lower. 
 
(b) The States will at their liberty to add any machine as per requirement provided that the machine is useful 
for crop residue management. 
 
 

210 
 
Annexure-XXX 
 
Pattern of Assistance and Maximum Permissible Subsidy per machine under the projects of Custom 
Hiring Centres 
S.No. 
Name of the machine/equipment 
Pattern of 
Assistance 
Maximum Permissible 
subsidy per Machine/ 
Equipment inclusive of 
GST @ 12% (Rs.) 
1.  Tractor 60 HP and above  
80% 
9,60,000 
2.  Super Straw Management System 
(Super SMS) to be attached with 
Combine Harvester 
80% 
95,520 
3.  (a) Happy Seeder  
(b) Smart Seeder 
 
 
a) 09 tine 
80% 
1,30,240 
b) 10 tine 
80% 
1,34,640 
c) 11 tine 
80% 
1,38,160 
d) 12 tine 
80% 
1,44,320 
4.  Paddy Straw Chopper/ 
Shredder/Mulcher 
 
 
a) Mounted type (Straw Chopper & 
Mulcher) 
 
 
i) 5 ft 
80% 
1,16,000 
ii) 6 ft 
80% 
1,37,280 
iii) 7 ft 
80% 
1,44,320 
iv) 8 ft 
80% 
1,53,120 
b) Trailed type 
80% 
2,35,360 
4 
Shrub Master/Rotary Slasher  
80% 
44,000 
5. 
Hydraulic Reversible M.B. Plough 
 
 
a) Two bottom 
80% 
1,12,800 
b) Three bottom 
80% 
1,46,400 
c) Four bottom 
80% 
2,00,640 
6. 
(a) Zero Till Seed cum Fertilizer Drill 
(b) Spatial Zero Till Drill 
 
 
9 tine 
80% 
39,680 
11 tine 
80% 
45,120 
13 tine 
80% 
49,280 
15 tine 
80% 
52,800 
7. 
Super Seeder  
80% 
1,92,000 
8. 
Surface Seeder 
80% 
70,400 
9. 
Baling Machines  
 
 
Balers (Round – Mini – upto 16kg per 
bale) 
80% 
3,52,000 
Balers (Round – Medium –above 16-25 
kg per bale) 
80% 
3,83,200 
Balers (Round –big-180-200 kg per bale) 
80% 
15,84,000 
Baler (Rectangular 18-20 kg per bale)  
80% 
10,56,000 
Straw Rake 
80% 
2,64,000 

211 
 
10. 
Crop Reaper 
 
 
(a) Tractor mounted 
80% 
1,32,000 
(b) Self-Propelled 
80% 
1,44,000 
Self-Propelled reaper cum Binder (3 
wheel) 
80% 
3,08,000 
Self-Propelled reaper cum Binder (4 
wheel) 
80% 
4,16,000 
 
Note: 
 
(a) The financial assistance will be limited to 80% of the cost of the machine or the maximum permissible 
subsidy per machine as indicated above, whichever is lower. 
 
(b) The States will be at their liberty to add any machine as per requirement provided that the machine is 
useful for crop residue management. 
 
 
 

212 
 
Annexure-XXXI 
 
Procedure for Credit Linked Capital Subsidy on the Custom Hiring Centres Projects and 
Paddy Straw Supply Chain Projects 
 
The following is the gist of procedure to be followed, to be read along with the flow charts and 
formats annexed: 
 
1. Advance Subsidy: The 50% eligible subsidy amount for the projects will be released as advance 
by the State Agriculture Departments to the participating Financial Institutions (Banks) on 
submission of project scrutiny note cum claim form as per requirement and the norms of the 
interventions. The same would be kept in a Subsidy Reserve Fund Account of the concerned 
borrowers, to be adjusted finally against loan amount of the bank towards the end of the repayment 
period and life of the project as per the time schedule. 
 
2. Final Installment of Subsidy: the remaining 50% would be disbursed to the participating Banks 
by the State Departments of Agriculture after conduct of an inspection and physical verification of 
the machines and equipments by the State Level Project Sanctioning Committee and officials from 
the financing banks.   
 
3. Adjustment of Subsidy to Borrower’s Account: The subsidy released to the bank for 
individual project will be kept in a separate borrower-wise account. The adjustment of subsidy will 
be back ended. Accordingly, the full project cost including the subsidy amount, but excluding the 
margin money contribution from the beneficiary, would be disbursed as a loan by the Banks. The 
repayment schedule will be drawn on the loan amount in such a way that the total subsidy amount 
is adjusted after the full bank loan component with interest is liquidated.  
 
4. Utilization Certificate: After release of final installment of subsidy, a Utilization Certificate is 
required to be submitted by the financing Bank certifying that the full amount of subsidy received 
in respect of the project has been fully utilized (by way of crediting to the “Subsidy Reserve Fund 
Account- Borrower –wise”) and adjusted in the books of Account under the sanctioned terms and 
conditions of the project within overall guidelines of the scheme. 
 
5. No Interest is chargeable on Subsidy Portion: For the purpose of charging interest on the loan 
component, the subsidy amount would be excluded. The balance lying to the credit of the subsidy 
reserve fund account will not form part of demand and time liabilities for the purpose of SLR/CRR 
 
6. Institutional Lending: 
(a) Eligible Financial Institutions: The eligible financing institutions under the scheme are (i) 
Commercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), State Cooperative Banks (SCBs), State 
Cooperative Agricultural and Rural Development Banks (SCARDBs), Scheduled Primary Urban 
Cooperative Banks (PUCBs), Agricultural Development Finance Companies (ADFCs) and  such 
other institutions (ii) Cooperatives where they seek loan from National Cooperatives Development 
Corporation (NCDC). 
 

213 
 
(b) Term Loan  
 
For the projects of Custom Hiring Centres and Paddy Straw Supply Chain projects, the amount as 
eligible as capital subsidy of the project cost can be raised as term loan from the financing banks. 
The repayment schedule will be drawn on the total loan amount (including subsidy) in such a way 
that the subsidy amount is adjusted after liquidation of the net bank loan (excluding subsidy). The 
financial institution may provide working capital separately for undertaking the business by the 
entrepreneurs. 
 
(c) Rate of interest and Scale of Financing to the ultimate borrower : As decided by the 
financing bank, as per their respective Board approved policy. 
 
(d) Security: The security will be as per norms prescribed by RBI from time to time. 
 
(e) Repayment Period: Repayment period will depend upon the cash flow and may be generally 
up to 5 years with a grace of one year. 
 
7. Procedure to be followed for sanctioning of project and release of subsidy 
 
(a) Interested beneficiaries will submit the project proposal for term loan and subsidy to Bank 
on application form as prescribed by the concerned bank along with project report and other 
documents for appraisal and sanction of loan. 
(b) Bank after appraisal and scrutiny of loan application will furnish a brief project profile-
cum-claim form for advance subsidy in the prescribed format as may be devised by the 
project sanctioning committee at the State level. The loan shall be disbursed by the Bank 
only after the project has been cleared and approved by the State level project sanctioning 
committee, which shall also have a representative of the concerned Bank. 
(c) The State Department of Agriculture on the recommendation of State level project 
sanctioning committee shall release 50% of the eligible amount of subsidy as advance 
subsidy to the participating bank for keeping the same in the subsidy fund account 
(borrower-wise) 
(d) The participating bank shall provide eligible amount of subsidy as term loan to the 
beneficiary. The banks at their discretion may extend full project cost as term loan to the 
beneficiary.  
(e) The beneficiary will inform the Bank that the required machines and equipments have been 
acquired by the beneficiary and the State level project sanctioning committee involving the 
bank official shall conducted the physical verification of the machines and equipments. 
After inspection the Bank will submit the claim form to the State Department of Agriculture 
for final subsidy. The claim form shall necessarily be enclosed with inspection report of 
the committee. The State Department of Agriculture shall release the final subsidy to banks 
which will be adjusted against the subsidy amount provided to the banks in advance.   
Monitoring of each project will be done by Banks branches and district level officers of the State 
Department of Agriculture with periodic reporting to the State Agriculture Department. 

214 
 
Annexure-XXXII 
 
(A) Indicative Capital Expenditure for Setting up Paddy Straw Supply Chain (For 3000 MT 
Paddy Straw per Season) 
 
Sr 
No  
Required machines 
Approximate 
Rate / Unit (Rs. 
in lakhs) 
Qty  
Tentative 
Amount  
(Rs. in Lakhs)  
1 
Cutter /Rotary Slasher 
0.70 
1 
0.70 
2 
Tedder Machine  
5.25 
1 
5.25 
3 
Raker  
5.85 
1 
5.85 
4 
Tractor 75 HP and above 
18.00 
1 
18.00 
5 
Baler (200-300 kg Bale) – 
Rectangular or round bale 
36.50  
1 
36.50 
6 
Tractor 50 HP for Tedder and 
Rake  
8.5 
2 
17.00 
7 
Trolley (Flat, Single Axle, Local 
Fabricator) /Automatic bale 
loading trolley  
3.50  
3 
10.50  
8 
Tractor attachment for Stacking 
(grabber)/ telehandler 
5.00  
1 
5.00  
9 
Moisture Meter  
0.35  
1 
0.35  
10 
Water tank (5000 Ltr)  
0.25  
1 
0.25  
11 
Fire Extinguisher  
0.05  
1 
0.05  
12 
Lightening Arrestor  
0.40  
1 
0.40  
Total  
 
 
99.85 or say Rs. 
1.00 Crore 
 
Note:  
(i) 
Tractors required for transport trollies and grabber are supposed to be taken on 
rental basis. 
(ii) 
The machines and equipments and their costs are indicative. The total project 
cost can only be arrived based on the proforma invoices of the sale of machines. 
(iii) 
Beneficiaries may have the choice of selection of equipments from within the list 
as per their requirement. 
(iv) 
The States also have the flexibility to include any machine under the projects as 
per their requirement.  
 
 
 

215 
 
(B) Indicative Capital Expenditure for Setting up Paddy Straw Supply Chain (For 4500 MT 
Paddy Straw per Season) 
 
 
Sr 
No  
Required machines 
Approximate 
Rate / Unit (Rs. 
in lakhs) 
Qty  
Tentative 
Amount  
(Rs. in Lakhs)  
1 
Cutter /Rotary Slasher 
0.70 
1 
0.70 
2 
Tedder Machine  
12.00 
1 
12.00 
3 
Raker  
25.00 
1 
25.00 
4 
Tractor 90-110 HP  
44.00 
1 
44.00 
5 
Baler (200-500 kg Bale) – 
Rectangular or round bale 
46.00  
1 
46.00 
6 
Tractor 50 HP for Tedder and 
Rake  
8.5 
2 
17.00 
7 
Trolley (Flat, Single Axle, Local 
Fabricator) /Automatic bale 
loading trolley  
3.50  
3 
10.50  
8 
Telehandler 
25.00  
1 
25.00  
9 
Moisture Meter  
0.35  
1 
0.35  
10 
Water tank (5000 Ltr)  
0.25  
1 
0.25  
11 
Fire Extinguisher  
0.05  
1 
0.05  
12 
Lightening Arrestor  
0.40  
1 
0.40  
Total  
 
 
181.25 or say Rs. 
1.80 Crores 
 
Note: 
(i) 
For the purpose of financial assistance, the project cost will be limited to Rs. 1.50 
Crores i.e. the project cost may be above Rs. 1.50 Crores/project, but the financial 
assistance from the Government will calculated based on the project cost of Rs. 
1.50 Crores/project. 
(ii) 
The machines and equipments and their costs are indicative. The total project cost 
can only be arrived based on the proforma invoices of the sale of machines. 
(iii) 
Beneficiaries may have the choice of selection of equipments from within the list 
as per their requirement. 
(iv) 
The States also have the flexibility to include any machine under the projects as 
per their requirement. 
 
 

216 
 
Annexure-XXXIII 
Sample Bi-Lateral Agreement 
 
This Agreement (herein referred to as “Agreement”) is made on this day of (DATE) at (PLACE). 
 
By and Between: 
 
1. ------- (Name of the Biomass Based Industry) -----, a Company Incorporated under 
Companies Act, 2013 and having its registered office at-----------------(complete address of 
Biomass industry)---------------(hereinafter referred to as “Industry” or “-----(Short Title 
of Biomass Based Industry)--------- ” which expression shall, unless repugnant to the 
context or meaning thereof, be deemed to include its successors and permitted assigns) of 
the FIRST PARTY; 
 
                                                                              AND 
2. BENEFICIARY, which expression shall unless repugnant to the context or meaning 
thereof, be deemed to include Farmer or group of Farmers or Rural Entrepreneurs or 
Cooperative Societies of Farmers or Farmers Producer Organizations (FPOs) or 
Panchayats (hereinafter referred to as “Aggregator” which expression shall, unless 
repugnant to the context or meaning thereof, be deemed to include its successors and 
permitted assigns) of the SECOND PARTY; 
 
(Both of the parties mentioned hereinabove shall be individually referred to as the “Party” and 
collectively as the “Parties”) 
WHEREAS 
(a) The “Government” intends to contain the burning of Agri-residue / paddy straw in the open 
fields through an approach of providing accepted solutions for ex-situ management of Agri-
residue / paddy straw and released guidelines vide OM No. -------- Dated ------ for providing 
financial assistance to Aggregator to establish Agri-residue / paddy straw supply chain for its 
utilization in different industries utilizing the same to achieve farmer’s welfare by way of 
reduced stubble burning and utilizing the abundant Agri-residue / paddy straw towards useful 
applications. 
 
(b) ----(Name of Biomass Based Industry) -------- referred to as an “Industry” is inter alia 
engaged in the manufacturing of --- (Products name) ------ from Agri-residue / paddy straw 
and other biomass.    ---- (Name of Biomass Based Industry) -------- has set up a --- (Products 
name) ------ Project with capacity (-------------------), will utilize approximately ----- tons of 
Agri-residue / paddy straw per day and will utilize approximately --------------- tons of Agri-
residue / paddy straw per year. The plant is in ------------(Location address of Biomass Based 
Industry /Plant). 
 
(c)  The --------(Name and address of Aggregator) --------  referred to as an “Aggregator” is 
desired and willing to invest into the establishment of Agri-residue / paddy straw supply chain 
by way of acquiring required machinery and equipments through financial support of the 

217 
 
Government and Industry and has agreed to collect, transport, store the Agri-residue / paddy 
straw at the allocated area or areas allotted by ---- (Name of Biomass Based Industry) -------
- and will supply the same to ---- (Name of Biomass Based Industry) --------. 
 
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing and the mutual covenants contained 
in this agreement, the receipt and sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, the Parties 
agree as follows: 
 
 
ARTICLE 1 
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION 
 
1.1 
Definitions: In this agreement, unless the context otherwise requires or expressly provides, 
the following words shall have the following meaning respectively: 
 
a) 
Business day shall be construed as a reference to a day (other than a Sunday) on 
which banks in the state where I&C Facility is situated are generally open for 
business 
b) 
Biomass Based Industry means industries utilizing the Agri-residue / paddy straw 
for various purposes  
c) 
Catchment area shall herein mean area within the radius of 10 to 35 kms of ------
(Name of Biomass Based Industry) ---- plant site situated ----- (Complete address of 
location) ------- 
d) 
Price in reference to this agreement will mean the price at which biomass-based 
industry will purchase Biomass from the Aggregator. 
 
e) 
Equipment or Machinery means equipments and machines that are covered under 
the supply chain i.e., Cutters/Rotary Slashers, tedder, Raker, Baler, tractor, loader, 
trolley, telehandler etc.  
 
f) 
Financial Assistance shall be in the form of subsidy which will be provided to the 
farmer by the Government and biomass-based industry in the ratio mentioned in the 
scheme guidelines under para ------. 
g) 
Law shall mean all statutes, enactments, acts of legislature or parliament, laws, 
ordinances, rules, regulations, code, directives and orders of any Government 
Authority, Tribunal, Board or Court and if applicable, International Treaties and 
regulations. 
 
h) 
MT means Metric tonnes 
 
 
i) 
OEMs shall mean Original Equipment Manufacturer of the equipments and 
machines that are covered under the supply chain 
 

218 
 
j) 
Principal place of Business in reference to this agreement means for parties --------
----- (Complete address of location of the biomass-based industry) -----------  
 
k) 
Supply (collection, transport and storage of Agri-residue / paddy straw) shall 
have meant ascribed to it in 
 
l) 
Supply Process Flow as indicated in para 8 of the concept note 
 
m) 
Software in reference to this agreement shall be called Straw management and 
automation mobile application which shall be given to the aggregators by ------------ 
(name of biomass-based industry) -------------. 
 
n) 
TPD means tonnes per day. 
 
 
1.2 
Interpretation 
 
Except where the context requires, this agreement shall be interpreted as follows: 
 
1 
References in this Agreement to any statutory provision shall include a reference to 
that statute or provision as amended, extended or re-enacted and to any statutory 
replacement thereof from time to time and shall also include reference to all statutory 
instruments and orders made pursuant to any such statutory provision.  
2 
the division of this Agreement into clauses and schedules and the insertion of 
headings and bold typeface are only for convenience and shall not affect the 
construction or interpretation of any provision of this Agreement; 
3 
words and numbers importing the singular shall include the plural and vice versa; 
4 
references to the Recitals, Clauses and Schedules are to the recitals and clauses of, 
and schedules to, this Agreement; 
5 
the Schedules to this Agreement form part of this Agreement and shall be deemed to 
be expressly set out in the body of this Agreement; 
6 
all words (whether gender-specific or gender neutral) shall be deemed of any gender 
are deemed to include the other gender; 
7 
the terms “hereof”, “herein”, “hereby”, “hereto” and derivative or similar words refer 
to this entire Agreement or specified Clauses of this Agreement, as the case may be; 
8 
a reference to any Party in this Agreement, including the Parties, shall, where the 
context permits, include such Person’s executors, administrators, heirs, legal 
representatives, successors and permitted assigns; 
9 
any obligation under this Agreement not to do something includes an obligation not 
to agree or allow that thing to be done; 
10 
an agreement, representation or warranty on the part of 2 (two) or more Persons binds 
them jointly and each of them individually; 
11 
a reference to any Law or to any provision thereof includes references to such Law 
as it may, during the term of this Agreement or the completion of the transactions 

219 
 
contemplated herein, be amended, consolidated, modified, re-enacted or replaced by 
any other Law and to any subordinate legislation or regulation made under the 
relevant Law; 
12 
Unless the context otherwise requires, any period of time refereed to shall be deemed 
to expire at the end of the last day of such period; 
13 
the expressions “hereof”, “herein” and other similar expressions shall be construed 
as references to this Agreement as a whole and not limited to the particular Clause or 
Schedule in which the relevant expression appears; 
14 
references to writing include in electronic form; 
15 
references to “Rupees”, “Rs.” and “INR” are references to the lawful currency of the 
Republic of India; 
16 
reference to any document includes an amendment or supplement to, or replacement 
or novation of, that document, but disregarding any amendment, supplement, 
replacement or novation made in breach of this Agreement; 
17 
reference to an “amendment” includes a supplement, modification, novation, 
replacement or re-enactment and “amended” is to be construed accordingly; 
18 
any word or phrase defined in the body of this Agreement as opposed to being defined 
in Article 1.1 above shall have the meaning assigned to it in such definition 
throughout this Agreement, unless the contrary is expressly stated or the contrary 
clearly appears from the context; 
19 
the Parties have each participated in the negotiation and drafting of this Agreement 
and if an ambiguity or question of interpretation should arise, this Agreement shall 
be construed as if drafted jointly by the Parties thereto and no presumption or burden 
of proof shall arise favouring or burdening either party by virtue of the authorship of 
any of the provisions in this Agreement; 
20 
This agreement is made and executed in the English, Hindi and Punjabi Language 
which shall be the governing text for all purposes. 
21 
Any reference to any period of time shall mean a reference to that according to Indian 
Standard Time; 
22 
Any reference to day shall mean a reference to a calendar day; 
23 
“Lakh” mean a hundred thousand (100,000) and crore means ten million 
(10,000,000); 
24 
Reference to a “person” and wording denoting a natural person shall be construed as 
a reference to any individual, firm company, corporation society, trust, government, 
state or agency of a state or any association or partnership (whether or not having 
separate legal personality) of two or more of the above and shall include successors 
and assigns; 
25 
The words “include” and “including” are to be construed without limitation and 
shall be deemed to be followed by “without limitation” or “but not limited to” 
whether or not they are followed by such phases; 
26 
Reference to any date, period or Project Milestone shall mean and include such date, 
period or Project Milestone as may be extended pursuant to this agreement; 
27 
The damages payable by either party to the other of them, as set forth in this 
agreement, whether on per diem basis or otherwise, are mutually agreed genuine pre-

220 
 
estimated loss and damage likely to be suffered and incurred by the party entitled to 
receive the same and are not by way of penalty (the “Damages”) and 
28 
Time shall be of the essence in the performance of the parties’ respective obligations. 
If any time period specified herein is extended, such extended time shall also be of 
the essence. 
 
ARTICE 2 
SCOPE OF THE AGREEMENT 
 
2.1 
This Agreement details the terms and conditions, financial arrangement and obligation 
of Government, Industry and Aggregator. Further, any specific terms or conditions, 
procedure or methodology specified/not specified in this Agreement, but relevant to the 
scope and deemed necessary to be amended/included, may be mutually discussed and 
agreed to between the Industry and Aggregator within two (2) months of signing of this 
Agreement and shall be included as an amendment as per Amendment Article of this 
Agreement. 
2.2 
Aggregator will undertake Activity at collection end of Agri-residue / paddy straw, 
transport, storage and supply it to industry in terms of this Agreement. The Industry and 
Aggregator shall respectively and faithfully abide by and subject themselves to the terms 
and conditions and stipulations of the Agreement. 
2.3 
The implementation of this Bi-lateral agreement is based on the Guidelines OM No. 
(……….) Dated…………., a pilot project basis to support the investment planned for 
ex-situ machinery deployment. The programme will be monitored by Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare with the help of Agriculture Departments of the State 
Government. However, the management of supply chain is the responsibility of the 
Industry in association with the Aggregator. 
 
ARTICE 3 
FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS 
 
3.1 
The projects will be implemented under this Bi-lateral agreement          between the 
(Name of biomass-based Industry) who shall be utilizing the Agri-residue / paddy straw 
---------- and ---------- (name of the Aggregator) --------------. This agreement is executed 
between the parties to ensure smooth implementation of the projects keeping the 
interests of the ---------- (name of biomass-based industry) -------------- project and -----
-------(Name of Aggregator) ---------- interests. 
3.2 
Financial assistance will be provided to the Aggregator only on the capital cost of 
machinery and equipment as indicated in the guidelines issued by the Government and 
the rest of the capital expenditure and required working capital may be arranged by the 
aggregator. For working capital, National Agriculture Infra Financing Facility (AIF) by 
the Farmer or NABARD project financing  or financing from any other Banks may be 
used.  

221 
 
3.3 
The Escrow agreement shall be executed between the Industry and the Aggregator. All 
cash inflows and outflows arising out of this agreement or matters incidental thereto 
shall be credited and debited, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of 
the escrow agreement. All the expenses and liabilities towards arrangement of such 
escrow account and agreement shall be borne by the Industry and Aggregator equally 
and jointly. 
 
ARTICE 4 
OBLIGATIONS 
4.1  Obligations of the Government: 
 
(a) Empanel the machinery suppliers 
(b) constitute a project sanctioning committee which shall devise a template for 
submission of project proposal by the Aggregator.  
(c) examine the proposals through project sanctioning committee and approve the projects 
of Agri-residue / paddy straw supply chain management within 5 days of receipt of 
proposals 
(d) facilitate the aggregator to get financing from AIF/NABARD/Other financial 
institutions 
(e) guide the Aggregator for obtaining all regulatory clearances, such as fire, land sealing, 
conversion from agricultural to non-agricultural and, availability of government land, 
electricity supply, transmission system, waiver of development charges of 
development authority etc. 
(f) physical inspection of the machinery procured by the Aggregators and process for 
release of financial assistance through Escrow Agreement. 
 
4.2  Obligations of the Industry: 
(a) Finalize and submit the project proposal in co-ordination with the Aggregator. 
(b) facilitate the Aggregator in site selection and obtaining all regulatory clearances 
(c) contribute required Industry share of the project as per guidelines into the Escrow 
account of the Aggregator 
(d) facilitate the Aggregator to get financing from AIF/NABARD/Other financial 
institutions 
(e) facilitate the Aggregator in procuring the required machinery and equipments from the 
OEMs empanelled by the Government. 
(f) provide daily scheduling to the Aggregator for supply of required quantity of paddy  
(g) create awareness amongst farmers residing/owing land/property in the catchment area 
by through convenient mode. 
(h) purchase all the collected Agri-residue / paddy straw from the Aggregator at a rate as 
may be mutually agreed by Aggregator and Industry. Revisit the rate Year-on-Year 
based on the market condition.  
(i) shall throughout monitor the effectiveness of the project 
(j) facilitate Aggregator in maintenance and service of the equipments and machines 
through the authorized service network of the OEMs. 

222 
 
(k) take actions against the Aggregator for not supplying the desired Quality, Quantity, 
Price and misuse of the equipment and machine in association with the Government 
through appropriate committee duly constituted for the purpose. 
(l) Responsible for asset utilization on yearly basis to the Government in terms of annual 
Agri- residue/ paddy straw collection (in tonnes per Agri-residue / paddy straw type). 
 
4.3 Obligations of the Aggregator: 
 
(a) arrange land for storage of the collected paddy under the guidance of Industry 
(b) obtain all regulatory clearances, such as fire, land sealing, conversion from agricultural 
to non-agricultural, electricity supply, transmission system, development charges of 
development authority etc.  
(c) place order with the empanelled OEMs for procurement of machinery as included in 
the project proposal. 
(d) Contribute required Aggregator share of the project as per guidelines into the Escrow 
Account. 
(e) secure Industry contribution for the proportionate amount as per the project proposal 
and guidelines of the Government 
(f) receive financial assistance from the Government in the Escrow account 
(g) secure required working capital either through own funding or AIF or NABARD or 
other bank financing  
(h) make payments to the OEMs towards the procurement of machinery in alignment with 
the Escrow Account regulations. 
(i) tie up with the farmers for procurement of straw from the farmer’s fields 
(j) engage necessary skilled and non-skilled manpower for continuous operation of the 
aggregation of Agri-residue / paddy straw 
(k) acquire required machines and collect the straw as per the scheduling as may be 
decided by Aggregator and Industry. 
(l) insure equipment or machinery against loss by theft, fire or by the Act of God 
(m) store baled straw as per the SOPs provided by the industry 
(n) insure the risk for the stock of biomass in storage, transit, fire and theft. 
(o) shall be responsible for the management of machinery for collection, Transportation, 
Storage of Agri-residue / paddy straw and also delivering the end product to the 
industry on timelines decided by Industry 
(p)  shall exclusively provide the Agri-residue / paddy straw at a agreed price to Industry 
only with whom the agreement is made and not to any other industry. 
(q) Restrict the use of machines only for the use of the industry in designated cluster. In 
case of use of machines for other Industry, shall take prior consent or no objection 
from the industry with whom the agreement is signed.   
(r) shall not transfer/sell/mortgage/ hypothecate the machines and equipment in any 
manner whatsoever.  
 
 

223 
 
ARTICLE 5 
PURCHASE OF MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT 
 
5.1 
The AGGREGATOR shall place an order with the empanelled manufacturers for 
procurement of Machinery and Equipments.  
 
5.2 
The Parties shall before (…….), open and establish an escrow account with the 
_____________Bank (the Escrow Bank”). The payment shall be made according to 
the timelines stated below: 
 
Financial Milestone/ Timelines: 
 
S.NO 
Parties to the 
Agreement 
Contribution 
in terms (%) 
Tentative timelines for 
releasing payment in 
“ESCROW ACCOUNT” 
(Tentative) 
1.  
GOVERNMENT 
65 
30.10.2024 
2. 
INDUSTRY 
as may be 
agreed 
between 
industry and 
aggregator 
10.07.2024 
3. 
AGGREGATOR 
Minimum 10  
10.07.2024 
 
5.3 
The payment toward the purchase of Equipment and Machinery will be made from the 
ESCROW Account to be opened in the name of INDUSTRY. The parties and 
government will transfer their respective contribution in the ESCROW account 
according to the ESCROW Agreement. 
5.4 
All the expenses and liabilities towards arrangement / opening of such escrow account 
and agreement shall be borne by the INDUSTRY and AGGREGATOR Jointly in 50 – 
50 Ratio.   
 
 
ARTICE 6 
OWNERSHIP OF EQUIPMENT AND MACHINES 
 
6.1 
The Government shall not own any Equipment or Machine. It would just purely 
provide financial support and would monitor the effectiveness of the project. 
6.2 
Industry shall throughout monitor the effectiveness of the project.  
6.3 
Industry shall act as the primary or only consumer of feedstock aggregated by the 
procured machinery under the scheme and shall have the first right of ownership of 

224 
 
machinery and can acquire possession in case of expiry of tenure of the agreement or 
termination due to any non-compliance or default on behalf of the Aggregator. 
 
 
 
ARTICE 7 
QUALITY COMPLIANCE PARAMETER 
 
7.1 
Below are the Quality acceptance criteria/ parameters of the straw to be supplied by the 
farmer at Industry Plant site. 
S. No. 
Description 
Acceptance Criteria 
Remarks 
1. 
Type of Bales 
To be decided by the industry 
 
2. 
Moisture 
To be decided by the industry 
 
3. 
Mandatory use of balers 
with cutting system 
To be decided by the industry 
 
4. 
Compression 
To be decided by the industry 
 
5. 
Stacking height  
To be decided by the industry 
 
 
 
ARTICE 8 
INDEMNITY 
Either party will indemnify, defend, and hold harmless other party (including its successors, 
affiliates and assigns) and their respective directors, officers, employees, agents and/or any 
third party (the "indemnified persons") against any and all losses, liabilities, judgments, 
awards, costs, claims, expenses, charges etc. (individually and collectively, referred to as 
"Damage") (i) a rising out of breach by the defaulting party of any of the terms contained 
herein; (ii) due to any representation, or other statement made by the defaulting party being 
or becoming untrue in any manner, (iii) due to any act, omission or negligence  of the 
defaulting party or its personnel and/or persons engaged by him(in) any claims that may be 
made by the defaulting party's personnel against the suffering party for any reason 
Whatsoever, without any limit in the amounts or time. 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 9 
 
INSURANCE 
 
9.1.Insurance against storage of Machine and equipments: 
a) It is a responsibility of the AGGREGATOR, at its own cost, during the tenure, 
to acquire adequate comprehensive insurance cover for corresponding to the risk 
of Equipment and machines against Marine, theft, fire etc; 

225 
 
b) For corresponding to the risk for the stock of biomass in storage, transit, fire and 
theft; 
c) The copy of insurance papers shall be supplied to Industry before training by 
OEMs for Machinery and Equipments starts for Aggregator & 
d) The Selection of insurer shall be the responsibility of the industry. 
9.2  Insurance against Machine and Equipments 
a) The Industry and the Aggregator shall purchase an Insurance cover in which 
contribution in terms of premium shall be borne by the Industry and the 
Aggregator; 
b) The industry shall pay premium in proportion to its own share as well as 
Government’s share in the capital cost of the machinery and equipment which 
comes out to be 90% (25% + 65%) contribution in terms of premium amount; 
c) The Aggregator shall pay premium contribution in proportion to its 10% share 
in the capital cost of the Machine and Equipments & 
d) The selection of Insurer shall be the responsibility of the industry. 
 
 ARTICLE 10 
 
VOLUME, QUALITY AND TRANSPORTATION OF CROP RESIDUE  
 
10.1 
INDUSTRY shall accept Crop Residue in case AGGREGATOR make compliance to the 
following criteria as given below 
 
(A) Volume for aggregation of Biomass (Agri-residue / paddy straw) 
 
S.No 
Description 
Default 
Remarks 
 
Volume: Capacity to 
supply Biomass fuel as 
per desired 
specifications (Per 
season) 
In 
case 
the 
supply is <40%  
(For supply of 
3000 MT)  
 
Written Notice will be issued 
stating with a onetime warning 
post Non-compliance of which can 
lead 
to 
a 
situation 
where 
ownership of the machines will be 
transferred 
to 
another 
AGGREGATOR after consulting 
with the committee defaulting 
AGGREGATOR. 
 
In 
case 
the 
supply is <30% 
(For supply of 
4500 MT) 
 
 
 
 

226 
 
(B) Quality compliance parameters 
S.No. 
Description 
Acceptance Criteria Remarks 
1. 
Type of Bales 
 
 
2. 
Moisture 
 
 
 
 
3. 
Mandatory use of balers 
with cutting system 
 
 
. 
4. 
Compression 
 
 
 
5. 
Stackling height  
 
 
 
 
(C) TRASNPORTATION OF BIOMASS FROM FARM TO GATE 
 
In case the AGGREGATOR defaults in supplying the agreed biomass from farm to gate 
i.e not transporting aggregated biomass to the gate then a Written Notice will be issued 
stating with a onetime warning post Non-compliance of which can lead to a situation where 
ownership of the machines will be transferred to another AGGREGATOR after consulting 
with the committee defaulting Aggregator. 
 
ARTICLE 11 
 
                         ASSIGNMENT AND SUBCONTRACT AND SUBSTITUTION 
11.1 
The “AGGREGATOR” shall not without the prior written approval of INDUSTRY, 
assign or transfer its rights or obligations under the agreement or any part thereof, or any 
share, or interest therein to any other person. 
 
11.2 
That in case “AGGREGATOR” is unable to perform in any Season, he can propose the 
name of other person in writing and if approved by Committee, he can substitute the 
AGGREGATOR for the Season and accordingly Rights and Obligation under this 
agreement will be Assigned to that Person and that Person for the purposes of this 
Agreement will know as Substituted Aggregator for that Season.  
 
11.3 
That in case of Assignment to Substituted Aggregator, Machinery and Equipment will be 
hand over by AGGREGATOR to that person for that particular Season. 
 
11.4 
That proposal of substitution should be made before 1st August of Every Year.  
 
 
 

227 
 
ARTICLE 12 
AMENDMENTS TO THE AGREEMENT 
 
No amendment or modification of this Agreement shall be valid unless the same is made in 
writing by the Parties and their authorized representatives and specifically stating the same to 
be an amendment of this Agreement. The modifications/ changes shall be effective from the 
date on which they are made/ executed unless otherwise agreed to. 
 
ARTICLE 13 
NOTICES 
 
All notices and communications required to be served under this agreement shall be 
considered to be duly served if the same been posted by registered mail at its last known 
address of business.  
ARTICLE 14 
TENURE 
This agreement shall come into force from the date of signing of this agreement and will 
continue till supply of quantity as given in Article… (which shall be added at the later stage) 
or Five years, whichever is earlier. 
 
ARTICLE 15 
EFFECTIVE DATE AND TERMINATION OF THE BI-LATERAL AGREEMENT 
 
15.1 
This Agreement shall be deemed to have come into effect from the date of             
signing of the Agreement.  
 
15.2 
Termination: This Agreement may be terminated by Industry in consultation with 
Government constituted committee by giving a one (7) days' notice in writing to 
Aggregator in the following cases:  
 
(a) 
If Aggregator obtains the financial assistance on the basis of false 
information/ false statement.  
(b) 
If Aggregator and Industry does not take up the Activity as per the terms of 
the Agreement.  
(c) 
If performance of Aggregator or Industry is not found satisfactory as per 
obligations indicated in Article 4 of the Agreement.  
(d) 
If any fraud/ embezzlement is detected subsequently and not reported by 
Aggregator or Industry.  
(e) 
Suppressing information regarding Conflict of Interest by the parties.  
(f) 
If Aggregator or Industry is declared insolvent by the relevant competent 
authority.  
(g) 
If Aggregator and Industry commits material breach of this Agreement.  
(h) 
Non-payment/ non-realization of penalties or any dues by the aggregator 
and/or Industry 
 

228 
 
15.3 
In the event of termination of the Agreement vide Clause 15.2, the rights and 
obligations of the Parties thereto shall be settled through mutual discussion between 
the Parties. Provided that any pending payments with respect to invoices for all 
completed Activities shall be paid by the Aggregator within thirty (30) days of date 
of termination of this Agreement. Provided further that in the event of termination of 
the Agreement vide Clause 15.2, the machines and equipment together with all 
physical assets acquired under the project are taken into the custody by the Industry.  
 
ARTICLE 16 
 
FORCE MAJEURE  
 
16.1 
Neither of the party, in any way, except for any payment related obligations, be held 
liable for non-performance either whole or in part of this agreement or for any delay in 
the performance thereof in consequence of any Act of God, epidemics, quarantine 
restrictions, lawful strike, lock out, delivery interruptions, orders including 
administrative orders or decrees of any Government or Government authority, 
revolutions, wars, acts of enemies embargoes or other import restrictions or by any other 
acts, whether or not of the same class or kind as those set forth above, not within the 
control of the party, fulfilment on whose part is interfered with and which by exercise 
of reasonable diligence, the said party is unable to prevent. 
 
16.2 
Promptly but not later than 2 days, upon the occurrence of an event or circumstance that 
a party considers may subsequently lead it to claim force majeure relief under this 
agreement, such party shall give notice to such effect to the other party, describing such 
event or circumstance and the obligations the performance of which could be delayed 
or prevented thereby, 
(a) 
The parties shall exercise reasonable diligence to resume normal performance of 
this agreement as soon as possible, after the occurrence of an event of force 
majeure. 
(b) 
Even prior to resumption of normal performance, the parties shall continue to 
perform their obligations under this agreement to the extent not prevented by 
such event of force majeure. 
 
 
ARTICLE 17 
 
GOVERNING LAWS AND JURISDICTION 
 
This agreement shall be governed and construed in accordance with the laws of India 
including without limitation, the relevant Central and State acts and the rules, regulations and 
notifications issued and amended there under from time to time and subject to clause 18 
below, the courts of (……..) shall have the exclusive jurisdiction in relation to all disputes 
arising from or relating to the agreement. 
 

229 
 
ARTICLE 18 
DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
 
18.1 
A dispute shall be deemed to have arisen under this agreement, when either party 
notifies the other party of any issue, difference or dispute in writing to that effect. 
18.2 
Any dispute arising out of this agreement shall be resolved amicably through 
discussions in good faith with a view to expeditiously resolve such dispute. In the 
event the Dispute cannot be resolved amicably with the period of 30 days from the 
date of its occurrence, either party may refer the dispute for resolution to State 
Government and even if not resolved, actions may be taken according to Arbitration 
and conciliation act, 1996. 
18.3 
The venue of arbitration shall be ---------- and the language of arbitration shall be in 
English or Punjabi. The arbitrator shall pass a reasoned award and the award shall be 
final and binding on all the parties. 
 
 
 
SEAL OF PARTIES 
In witness whereof the Parties here to have signed this Agreement on the day of (Month) and 
year mentioned hereinbefore 
 
For and on behalf of Industry   
Name:  
Designation:  
Seal:______________  
For and on behalf of Aggregator 
Name:  
Designation:  
Seal:______________  
 
Witnesses: (Name Address)  
1. ________________  
2. ________________  
Date: _____________  
Witnesses: (Name Address)  
1. ________________  
2. ________________  
Date: _____________  
 
 
 

230 
 
Annexure-XXXIV 
 
User manual for Mobile application 
 
 
SHC Mobile App User Guide 
 
App Version 1.2.0.4 
Farmer Registration and the Sample Collection 
Can be done in Both Online & Offline Mode 
*** 
किसान पंजीिरण और नमूना संग्रह ऑनलाइन 
और ऑफलाइन दोनों मोड में किया जा सिता है 
 
 
Updated on: 30/04/2024 
 
 

231 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
SHC Mobile App 
3 
Instruction for version 1.2.0.4 
4 
How to Update 
4 
App Install 
4 
Device Requirement 
5 
Login 
7 
Dashboard 
8 
Select Scheme: 
8 
Select Cycle: 
8 
Change language 
9 
District selection 
10 
Online and Offline Mode 
10 
Unallotted Tests 
12 
Farmer Registration 
12 
(Refer Offline Farmer Registration : Page No.: 25) 
12 
Plot Registration 
14 
(Refer Offline Sample collection : Page No.: 25) 
14 
Sample Collection 
18 
(Refer Offline Sample collection : Page No.: 30) 
18 
Run Test 
20 
Run Test: Private Labs 
23 
Track Sample 
25 
Offline Mode 
26 
Farmer Registration 
26 
Plot Registration 
27 
Sample Collection 
31 
View Offline Record: 
34 
Edit/Delete Details of Farmers Registered: 
35 
Edit/Delete Details of Sample collection: 
36 
Import / Export the Offline Records: 
37 
Sync offline registered data to online: 
39 
Sample Collection under Incentive to VLSTL: 
41 
Triple Bar Icon Options 
42 
Registered Farmer’s List: 
43 
Bulk Upload: 
45 

232 
 
My Profile: 
49 
Instructions for offline registration: 
50 
Logout Option 
51 
Technical Support 
52 
 

233 
 
SHC Mobile App 
Instruction for version 1.2.0.4 
● App will operate in both online or offline mode for farmer registration and sample collection. 
Online / Offline modes can be enabled simply by pressing the online slider button in the 
app home page below the sample collection dashboard. 
● Users does not required internet connection to do the registration in offline mode 
● In offline mode users have to sync the data to upload online and to view in track samples. 
Users are restricted to sync the data only between 5PM to 10AM 
● QR code scanning has been disabled for offline mode 
● Sample ID will be generated automatically and has to be pasted in the soil sample for 
testing purpose 
 
How to Update  
● Sync or export the existing offline records. Send the exported record file to the 
STL/District/customer service team for safety  
● Update the app from Google Play Store: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.kt_goi_shc&hl=en 
● Import the offline records 
 
 
NOTE: Update notification will pop up whenever the latest version is available in the playstore  
 

234 
 
App Install 
Download and Install the Mobile app from the drive link given below:  
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.kt_goi_shc 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
Device Requirement 
● Android 9.0 and above 
 
App Permission  
● Allow SHC to take pictures and record video 
○ Select “While using the app” to accept  
● Allow SHC to access this device’s location 
○ Choose “Precise” and select “While using the app” to accept  
● Allow SHC to make and manage phone calls 
○ Select “Allow” 
● Allow SHC to access photos, videos, music and audio on this device 
○ Select “Allow” 
Kindly make sure all the above permissions are enabled as per procedure to avoid the interruption 
in the registration process  
 

235 
 
❖ You may need to enable “Allow access to manage all files” permission for all files access 
to store & view the offline records and press back button in the top to visit the main page 
 
           
 
 
        
 
 
 

236 
 
Login 
● Open the SHC mobile application 
● You will be navigated to login page with selection of “Soil Health Card” or “School 
Soil Health Card”, “User Type”, “username” and “Password” 
● Choose the type in the radio button of your login 
● Select User type as STL or Saathi from the dropdown menu 
● Fill out all the credentials and make sure that by default the checkbox “By login, 
you accept to our Terms of use…” is marked or not, if not need mark the check 
box 
● Click on “LOGIN” button 
 
 
 
 
 

237 
 
Dashboard 
Now, the allotment count is fetched based on the scheme and cycle parameters. 
 
Select Scheme: 
To view the scheme wise progress, click on the scheme name and select the scheme name provided in the 
dropdown 
 
Select Cycle: 
To view the Cycle wise progress, click on the year option and select the cycle provided in the dropdown 
 
 
 
 
 
 

238 
 
Change language 
● You can change the language of your preference by clicking on the “CHANGE 
LANGUAGE” button from the triple bar icon in the top left corner. 
● After this, you will be navigated to “Choose the language” page 
● Here you will have a list of 11 languages and choose one language whichever you 
prefer. Click on the “OK” button. 
● The App language can also be changed from the login page. 
or
 
 
 
 
           
  

239 
 
 
District selection 
Users can register the samples from the other districts, by downloading the village list  available 
in other districts. The procedure to download the village list is as follows: 
● Click on the triple bar icon in the top left corner in the home page 
● Select “Download Village List” option 
● Select the district from the dropdown of where you are going to collect the samples and 
press “Download” to download the village list of the selected district 
● If the user needs to select the village from other district, they can repeat the same process 
   
 

240 
 
Online and Offline Mode 
● There is a toggle button provided in the home page to Register farmers and sample collection in 
Offline and Online mode 
 
 
 
 

241 
 
Unallotted Tests 
Users have the option to collect soil samples without target allotment by activating the 'Unallotted Tests' 
feature on the home screen. Please note that these tests are not subsidized by the government, therefore 
testing fees must be collected directly from the farmer or landowner seeking a soil health card. 
To enable unallotted tests: 
1. Slide the 'Unallotted Tests' toggle to the ON position.  
2. A popup will appear; press 'Yes' to confirm.  
3. Once activated, users can collect samples without a target allotment. 
 
Fig. Enabling unallotted tests 
 
 
Farmer Registration 
(Refer Offline Farmer Registration : Page No.: 25) 
User needs to add farmer details for whom the soil sample test is being conducted. The 
procedure to add the details of the farmers is as follows: 
● Click on the “Farmer Registration” button in the home page 
● Add the details of the farmer: 
● Name of the farmer 
● Preferred language of the farmer 
● Mobile number of the farmer 

242 
 
● Email(Optional) 
● Address of the farmer: Select Block, Village, and fill Building number/ Door 
number etc. There is a Set default option for Block and village selection for 
collecting multiple samples in the same village.  
● Click on the “Submit” button. You will get a popup with “Farmer registered Successfully” 
   
  
 
 
 
 

243 
 
Plot Registration 
(Refer Offline Sample collection : Page No.: 25) 
Once the farmer details are available in the SHC database / Offline records,  
● Click the Sample Collection button in the home page. 
● Enter the Mobile Number of Registered Farmers 
● To edit the farmer details click on Edit option 
● To register a plot Click on Add Plot option 
● If the Plot has been registered, Click on Collect sample 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

244 
 
The user needs to add the plot that is associated with the farmer. This information is mandatory 
before running the tests. The following plot information are collected from a the farmer:  
● Location of the plot: Geo location will be captured automatically (the field officer has to 
visit the field while registration). User can refresh the geo location by clicking the Map icon 
on the location field 
● State: Based on the STL, it is auto fetched and cannot be changed 
● District : Based on the STL, it is auto fetched and can be changed in the Download Village 
List Option 
● Mandal/Block: Dropdown field 
● Village: Dropdown field. (For multiple collections in the same village, Click on the Default 
button) 
● Survey Number: The survey number of the plot being added is captured here 
● Soil Color: Dropdown field (if one is unaware of this, select the option “unsure”) 
● Soil Type: Dropdown field 
● Area Size: The size of the plot that is being added (it can either be in acres or 
hectares) 
● Plot Image: Need to take a picture of plot 
● Whether field is organically cultivated: Yes or No 
● If Certified: Yes/No 
● After all the fields are filled, select “Submit” to register the sample 
Note: 
❖ GPS location permission is required to get the plot location 
❖ Camera permission is required to scan the QR code and to take plot images 
❖ If any of the app permission is turned off, user cannot register the soil sample 
Optional Details: 
● Click on “show more” option to add the optional details 
● Previous Crop: Dropdown field (list will not be available as the sample has been 
registered in offline mode) 
● Stoniness: A radio button. Can have the value of Yes/No. If the farmer/input 
operator is not sure of the same, please select “Unsure” 
● Land Sloping: A radio button. Can have the value Yes/No. If the farmer/input 
operator is not sure of the same, please select “Unsure” 
● Drainage: A dropdown field 
● Water source: A dropdown field 

245 
 
● Water source capacity: This field appears only when the “Water Source” is NOT 
rainfed. It is a dropdown field 
● Electricity connection at Farm: Yes/No 
● Electricity Phase: This appears if the “Electricity Connection” value entered by 
the farmer/input operator is “Yes” 
● Irrigation Pump: This appears if the “Electricity Connection” value entered by the 
farmer/input operator is “Yes” 
 
 
 
● Pump Size in HP: This appears if the “Irrigation Pump” value entered by the farmer/input 
operator is “Yes” 
● DT Connection: A dropdown field 
● Previous Yield: Numeric field (Previous yield obtained) 
● Target Yield: Numeric field (Target yield for the current season) 
● Previous Yield Price: Numeric field (should be in INR/quintal) 
● The amount of manure added: Numeric field 
● Fertilizer that was applied in the previous season 
After filling the above details click on the “SUBMIT” button. 
 

246 
 
Sample Collection 
(Refer Offline Sample collection : Page No.: 30) 
Once the farmer details and plot details are available in the SHC database / Offline records,  
● Click the Sample Collection button in the home page. 
● Enter the Mobile Number of the Registered Farmers 
● To edit the farmer details click on Edit option 
● To register a plot Click on Add Plot 
● If the Plot has been registered, Click on Collect sample 
  
  
 
 
            
 

247 
 
  
 
 
 
 
The user needs to add the sample details. This information is mandatory before running the tests. 
The following information is collected from the farmer:  
● Location of the plot: Geolocation will be captured automatically (the field officer has to visit 
the field while registering). Users can refresh the geolocation by clicking the update button 
on the location field  
● Select Scheme: Select the Scheme from the dropdown list accordingly. 
● Select Cycle: Select the year under which the sample is to be collected 
● Preferred Crops: Up to 6 Crops can be selected from the dropdown list. (If the same crops 
are to be selected for multiple samples, Click on the Default button) 
● Click on the QR code symbol to scan the QR code 
● After all the fields are filled, select “Submit” to register the sample 
Note: 
❖ GPS location permission is required to get the plot location 
❖ Camera permission is required to scan the QR code 
❖ If any of the app permission is turned off, user cannot register the soil sample 
 
Optional Details: 
● Click on “show more” option to add the optional details 
● Previous Crop: Dropdown field (list will not be available as the sample has been 
registered in offline mode) 

248 
 
● Previous Yield: Numeric field (Previous yield obtained) 
● Target Yield: Numeric field (Target yield for the current season) 
● Previous Yield Price: Numeric field (should be in INR/quintal) 
● The amount of manure added: Numeric field 
After filling the above details click on the “SUBMIT” button. 
 
 

249 
 
 
Run Test 
NOTE: The result entry for samples collected without QR code is to be done in the Soil health card portal 
using STL login. 
 
● Option 1:Click on the “Run Test” button in the home page 
○ Camera will open and scan the QR code which is uploaded during plot 
registration 
○ After scanning the QR code, farmer details will be displayed correspond to 
the sample 
○ Click on the Farmer name and Plot Details will be shown. Click on the plot details. 
● Option 2: Click on Registered farmers option in the triple bar icon 
○ Select the option “collected sample”  for the respective farmer 
○ Select the option “Run Test” to the respective sample 
● Here we need to select the device (Click on the “Select the device” button) 
● Device list will display and select the device 
● Click on “NEXT” button 
○ Static Lab: If you selected “Static lab” as a device, list of parameters will 
display and need to pass the value for all the parameters 
○ Third-party app: If a third-party app is used to perform the test, the third-
party app is launched to complete the test. The test results are automatically 
fetched to the SHC database after the completion of the test. 
○ Click on the “SUBMIT” button 
Note: 
❖ Run Test option is enabled only to STL users. Saathi cannot run the test. 
 

250 
 
Run Test: Option 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Run Test: Option 2 

251 
 
 
 
 
 

252 
 
Run Test: Private Labs 
For Private labs, the option to run the test is enabled so that the soil analysis is performed using third-party 
apps. To run the test follow these steps: 
1. Navigate to the 'Registered Farmers' page and search for the desired farmer. 
2. Click on the ‘Collected Sample’ button to view the soil samples collected for that farmer. The 
sample details will be displayed. 
3. Click the ‘Run Test’ button to proceed. 
4. The farmer's details will appear. From the dropdown menu, select the device you wish to use for 
the soil test, then click the ‘Next’ button. 
5. A third-party application will launch. Click the ‘Accept’ button to continue. 
6. Follow the guidelines provided by the device manufacturer to perform the soil analysis. 
7. Once the soil analysis is completed successfully, the SHC (Soil Health Card) application will 
reopen displaying the test results. 
8. Click the ‘Proceed’ button. After the test results are uploaded, users can view the Soil Health 
Card either from the ‘Registered Farmers’ page or the ‘Track Sample’ page. 
9. If a test fails in the third-party application, users can simply repeat the procedure outlined to 
perform the tests again. 
 
 
 

253 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                              Third-party App 
NOTE: 
If the plot location and image are missing, users should utilize the edit option to update both the 
plot image and location. 
 
 

254 
 
Track Sample  
Here you can check the status of your soil sample. 
● Click on the “Track Sample” button in the home page 
● Search farmer dialog box will display, here we need to enter the mobile number 
which was entered during the farmer registration, and click on “SUBMIT” button 
● Farmers list which is associated with the entered mobile number will display, select 
the farmer and the respective plot to which you wish to check the status. 
● User can edit the plot/sampe details using “Edit Test” option 
● User can run the test without scanning the QR code using “Run Test” option in the track 
sample page 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

255 
 
Offline Mode 
In offline mode, users can do the farmer registration and collect Samples for offline registered 
Samples. SHC App will work in offline mode if the internet or network is not available. Users can 
use offline mode by selecting the online/offline toggle button.  
Note: 
❖ Login has to be done while the internet is connected 
❖ Village list for the registration should be downloaded while the internet is connected, if the 
sample is collected from different district 
 
Farmer Registration 
User needs to add farmer details for whom the soil sample test is being conducted. The procedure 
to add the details of the farmers is as follows: 
● Click on the “Farmer Registration” button in the home page 
● Add the details of the farmer: 
● Name of the farmer 
● Preferred language of the farmer 
● Mobile number of the farmer 
● Email(Optional) 
● Address of the farmer: Select Block, Village, and fill Building number/ Door number 
etc. There is a Set default option for Block and village selection for collecting 
multiple samples in the same village.  
● Click on the “Submit” button. You will get a popup with “Farmer registered Successfully” 

256 
 
  
  
  
 
Plot Registration 
Once the farmer details are available in the SHC database / Offline records,  
● Click the Sample Collection button in the home page. 
● Enter the Mobile Number of Registered Farmers 
● To edit the farmer details click on Edit option 
● To register a plot Click on Add Plot option 
● If the Plot has been registered, Click on Collect sample 
 
  
  

257 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The user needs to add the plot that is associated with the farmer. This information is mandatory 
before running the tests. The following plot information are collected from a the farmer:  
● Location of the plot: Geo location will be captured automatically (the field officer has to 
visit the field while registration). User can refresh the geo location by clicking the Map icon 
on the location field 
● State: Based on the STL, it is auto fetched and cannot be changed 
● District : Based on the STL, it is auto fetched and can be changed in the Download Village 
List Option 
● Mandal/Block: Dropdown field 
● Village: Dropdown field. (For multiple collections in the same village, Click on the Default 
button) 
● Survey Number: The survey number of the plot being added is captured here 
● Soil Color: Dropdown field (if one is unaware of this, select the option “unsure”) 
● Soil Type: Dropdown field 
● Area Size: The size of the plot that is being added (it can either be in acres or hectares) 
● Plot Image: Need to take a picture of plot 
● Whether field is organically cultivated: Yes or No 
● If Certified: Yes/No 
● After all the fields are filled, select “Submit” to register the sample 
Note: 

258 
 
❖ GPS location permission is required to get the plot location 
❖ Camera permission is required to scan the QR code and to take plot images 
❖ If any of the app permission is turned off, user cannot register the soil sample 
 
Optional Details: 
● Click on “show more” option to add the optional details 
● Previous Crop: Dropdown field (list will not be available as the sample has been 
registered in offline mode) 
● Stoniness: A radio button. Can have the value of Yes/No. If the farmer/input operator is 
not sure of the same, please select “Unsure” 
● Land Sloping: A radio button. Can have the value Yes/No. If the farmer/input operator is 
not sure of the same, please select “Unsure” 
● Drainage: A dropdown field 
● Water source: A dropdown field 
● Water source capacity: This field appears only when the “Water Source” is NOT rainfed. 
It is a dropdown field 
● Electricity connection at Farm: Yes/No 
● Electricity Phase: This appears if the “Electricity Connection” value entered by the 
farmer/input operator is “Yes” 
● Irrigation Pump: This appears if the “Electricity Connection” value entered by the 
farmer/input operator is “Yes” 
● Pump Size in HP: This appears if the “Irrigation Pump” value entered by the farmer/input 
operator is “Yes” 
● DT Connection: A dropdown field 
● Previous Yield: Numeric field (Previous yield obtained) 
● Target Yield: Numeric field (Target yield for the current season) 
● Previous Yield Price: Numeric field (should be in INR/quintal) 
● The amount of manure added: Numeric field 
● Fertilizer that was applied in the previous season 
After filling the above details click on the “SUBMIT” button. 

259 
 
  
 
 
 

260 
 
Sample Collection 
Once the farmer details and plot details are available in the SHC database / Offline records,  
● Click the Sample Collection button in the home page. 
● Enter the Mobile Number of Registered Farmers 
● To edit the farmer details click on Edit option 
● To register a plot Click on Add Plot 
● If the Plot has been registered, Click on Collect sample 
  
 
 
  
 
 

261 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
The user needs to add the sample details. This information is mandatory before running the tests. 
The following information are collected from a the farmer:  
● Location of the plot: Geo location will be captured automatically (the field officer has to 
visit the field while registration). User can refresh the geo location by clicking the Map icon 
on the location field 
● Select Scheme: Select the Scheme from the dropdown list accordingly. 
● Select Cycle: Select the year under which the sample is to be collected 
● Preferred Crops: Upto 6 Crops can be selected from the dropdown list. (If the same crops 
are to be selected for multiple samples, Click on the Default button) 
● QR code cannot be scanned in offline mode 
● After all the fields are filled, select “Submit” to register the sample 
● Pop up message with a sample ID will be displayed. Note down the sample ID and click 
on OK 
Note: 
❖ GPS location permission is required to get the plot location 
❖ Camera permission is required to scan the QR code 
❖ If any of the app permission is turned off, user cannot register the soil sample 
 
Optional Details: 
● Click on “show more” option to add the optional details 

262 
 
● Previous Crop: Dropdown field (list will not be available as the sample has been 
registered in offline mode) 
● Previous Yield: Numeric field (Previous yield obtained) 
● Target Yield: Numeric field (Target yield for the current season) 
● Previous Yield Price: Numeric field (should be in INR/quintal) 
● The amount of manure added: Numeric field 
After filling the above details click on the “SUBMIT” button. 
 
 

263 
 
View Offline Record: 
● Click on the triple bar icon in the top left corner in the home page 
● Click on “View Offline Record” 
● The list of offline registered farmers details is shown on the screen. 
        
 
 
 
Note: 
● After Import, the user will not be able to see the offline records, if the samples are 
collected 1.1.20.1 or earlier, due to addition of block feature from 1.1.21.0 
● If the samples cannot be synced, it can be exported again and share it to our customer 
support team 
 
 

264 
 
Edit/Delete Details of Farmers Registered: 
The details of the farmers collected in offline mode like name, Mobile number & Address can be 
edited. The offline farmers registered can also be deleted before Syncing to the server.  
● Click on the triple bar icon in the top left corner in the home page 
● Click on “View Offline Record” 
● Click on the Edit button below the farmer details  
● Edit the Farmer details and click Submit button 
● Click the Delete button to delete the offline registered farmer details. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Edit/Delete Details of Sample collection: 
The details of the samples collected in offline mode like Crop, Village, soil details & survey number 

265 
 
can be edited. The offline samples registered can also be deleted before Syncing to the server.  
● Click on the triple bar icon in the top left corner in the home page 
● Click on “View Offline Record” 
● Click on the Edit button below the plot details  
● Edit the sample details and click Submit button 
● Click the Delete button to delete the offline samples registered 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Import / Export the Offline Records: 
● Click on the triple bar icon in the top left corner in the home page 
● Click on “View Offline Record” 
● Click on “Export” 

266 
 
 
 
 
● Users can export the data collected in offline mode, if they face any issues during 
synchronization. 
● Export can be done in different mediums (ex: e-mail, whatsapp, etc.) 
● Export file will be in txt format 
● After the export, If the file is not shared, find the json formatted file in below path in your mobile 
 
● Click on “Import” to import the last exported file of the same Login. If the user logs in with a 
different ID the log file will not get imported, and “Corrupted file” message will be displayed. 
 

267 
 
                                  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sync offline registered data to online: 
● Users have to sync the data to upload online and to view in track samples. Users are 
restricted to sync the data only between 5PM to 10AM 

268 
 
● To Sync the data collected in offline mode to the SHC server, you need a stable internet 
connection. Turn on the internet. 
● Click on the triple bar icon in the top left corner in the home page 
● The number of records collected in offline mode is displayed in front of the Sync button. 
Press the Sync  
● “Uploading Data” will be displayed.  
● After a few seconds (depending on the number of farmers registered & samples collected 
in offline mode), “Sync successful” message is displayed. 
● If “Error connecting server, please try again” is displayed on the screen. Click the Sync 
button again. 
  
 or 
 
 
 
 
 
 

269 
 
Sample Collection under Incentive to VLSTL: 
● Once the farmer details are available in the SHC database / Offline records, click the 
Incentive to VLSTL button in the home page. 
● Click on “Sample Collection under Incentive to VLSTL” 
● Enter the mobile number and click “Submit” button to start registering the sample 
● Separate dashboard is available for Incentive to VLSTL page 
Note: 
❖ Only Village Level STL user can access this page for the sample collection 
 
 
 
 
 
● Follow the same procedure of sample collection to register the plot under Incentive to VLSTL 

270 
 
Triple Bar Icon Options 
 
● Registered Farmers (0) 
● Bulk Upload (0) 
● Run Test for School 
● Language Change 
● FAQ 
● View Offline Record 
● Sync (Offline Records: 0) 
● Download Village List 
● Download Crop List 
● About us 
● User Manual 
● My Profile 
● App Video Guide 
● Support 
● Logout 
 
 
 

271 
 
Registered Farmer’s List: 
● Users can view/Edit the online registered farmers under the STL/Saathi login 
● Click on the triple bar icon in the top left corner in the home page 
 
 
 
 
 
● Users can edit the online registered farmer’s details  
○ Select “Edit” option under the farmer’s details 
○ Modify the details and Submit to update the details 
● Users can track the sample under this section of the particular farmer 
● Users can also collect the soil sample under this section of the particular farmer 
● Registered Farmer page can be sorted by 
○ Date 
○ Farmer Name 
○ Village 
○ Samples collected / Samples not collected 
● Select the sort option and click “Apply filter”. If you want to clear the filter, click “Clear” button 
on the filter page 
● Registered Farmer page can also be sorted by  
○ Allotted/Unallotted 
○ Scheme 
○ Cycle 
● Registered Farmer page can be filtered by 
○ Farmer name 

272 
 
○ Mobile number 
● If the farmer’s list is not updated, “Refresh” button is available to update the registered farmer’s 
page 
 
      
     
 
 
 

273 
 
Bulk Upload: 
● Users can access the bulk uploaded data of farmer registration and sample collection uploaded in 
the STL login under Bulk upload (2023-24) option in the admin panel 
● STL users cannot Run the test of bulk uploaded data of 2023-24 until STL/saathi users update the 
plot geolocation and the plot image by visiting the field using the mobile application. 
Procedure to upload the excel file by the STL user: 
Step1: Download Sample file By clicking on Download Excel file 
Step2: Fill the Sample File 
Step3: Select Farmer's District, Sub district, Village and Crops(Upto 6 crops) and results. 
Step4: Click on Upload File button and Upload the file 
Step5: Click on Submit button 
Step6: After upload is successful, use the export option in the 'Soil Health Cards' page and check if all the 
records are uploaded. If any records are missing in exported file, upload only missing records 
separately in the excel file 
Procedure to download the bulk upload data in mobile app: 
● Click on the triple bar icon in the top left corner in the home page 
● Click on “Bulk Upload” 
● Click on the Download button. 
● Select the Block and Village and Download. 
● To update the Plot details of the Farmers 
● Click on “Collected Sample” 
● Select “Edit Test” button 
● By default location will be displayed as 0.0, 0.0 
● Click on map button in the location field to refresh the geo location 
● Verify all other fields uploaded using excel file such as mandal, preferred crops, survey 
no, soil color, soil type 
● Take the plot image 
● Note down the sample ID available in the QR code field 
● Click “submit” to update the plot details 
● Once the plot details has been updated, this farmer details and sample details will be 
enabled in the Registered farmer’s page for  
Procedure to update the plot location and image: 
● Click on the triple bar icon in the top left corner in the home page 
● Click on “Bulk Upload” 
● Click on “Collected Sample” 
● Select “Edit Test” button 
● By default location will be displayed as 0.0, 0.0 
● Click on map button in the location field to refresh the geo location 
● Verify all other fields uploaded using excel file such as mandal, preferred crops, survey 
no, soil color, soil type 
● Take the plot image 
● Note down the sample ID available in the QR code field 

274 
 
● Click “submit” to update the plot details 
● Once the plot details have been updated, this farmer details and sample details will be 
enabled for printing the Soil health card. 
 
Note: 
❖ User cannot Run the test in Bulk Upload option 
❖ User cannot Run the test in Registered farmer page without updating the plot details in Bulk Upload 
 
 
 
 
 
 

275 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: 

276 
 
 
 

277 
 
 
 
My Profile: 
● Users can view their profile details in My Profile option 
● They can also check their sample collection status in each scheme and cycle 
              
           
 

278 
 
 
Instructions for offline registration: 
1. In offline mode, the data is stored in the phone's local memory. In case App data is cleared 
from settings by the user, the offline data will be lost if not synced. So users must Sync offline 
data or Export offline data before clearing App data. 
2. Offline app data will be lost if the user logs out if data is not synced before logout. A message 
is displayed if the user tries to logout when offline data is still in the local memory. 
3. Do not collect huge amounts of records offline like 100s of samples without syncing the data to 
the server. In case if the data is lost because of any of the reasons stated in 1, 2, 3, the offline 
data can not be recovered at any cost.  
4. It is advised to use the offline mode to collect only 10-20 samples and whenever net connectivity 
is available, please Sync the data to the server. Understand the offline mode by collecting 5-10 
samples by turning off the internet to understand how it works. Then Sync the data by connecting 
to the Internet. After Sync, check the sample collection status by using Track Sample. 
5. App login will not work in offline mode. Users need to login to the app when connected to the 
internet only. 
6. QR scan is disabled in offline mode. QR scan is not needed in offline mode. After submission, 
a Sample ID is displayed on the screen. This Sample ID must be noted and needed for the Run 
Test.  Option to scan QR or entry of Sample ID in 'Run Test' will be given in the upcoming update.  
7. Users can use offline mode by turning off the mobile data/internet in case of server congestions 
or slow response from server. Frequently sync the data in case more data is collected in offline 
mode.  
 
 

279 
 
Logout Option 
● You can logout from the application by clicking on the “Logout” button available at 
the top right corner of the home page. 
● You can also logout from the application by clicking on the triple bar icon in the top 
left corner of the home page 
● In the menu option, select“Logout” 
● In the confirmation dialogue box, select on “OK” (please ignore the message: data 
present in local will be lost, sync before logout) 
● In the Alert dialogue box, select “ EXPORT & LOGOUT” option to export the offline 
records, if any available 
● You will then be redirected back to the login page and you can either enter a 
new username/password or again log back in with the same credentials 
● After logging in there will be a popup message asking to import the exported file. (if 
there was any exported file while logging out) 
● If you want to import the files then click on IMPORT, If not then click on DON’T 
IMPORT. 
               
  

280 
 
                
 
 
 
Technical Support 
If you have any queries related to the usage of the mobile application, please send us an email at: 
soilhealthcard.support@krishitantra.com 
Alternatively, you can raise a ticket by visiting our support page at: 
https://support.soilhealth.dac.gov.in/ 
 
****************** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

281 
 
Annexure-XXXV 
 
Citizen Charter 
 

282 
 
CITIZEN CHARTER 
(Soil Testing and Issue of Soil Health 
Card) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Soil sample collection, processing, analysis and issue of Soil Health Card to 
individual farmers with details of personal information, soil health parameters and 
recommendation within 25 days (30 days in case of Hilly & NE states) of soil sample 
collection. Creation of awareness among the farmers about the Soil Health Card 
parameters and the recommendations given at the time of issuing of Soil Health Card 
for soil and crop management. 

283 
 
FLOW CHART 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Soil Sample Analysis 
100 samples/week (20-25 samples per day) pH, EC, Organic C, Available 
N, P, K, S, Fe, Mn, Zn, Cu and B as per standard lab procedure 
4. Generation of Soil Health Card (SHC) 
100 SHC in 2 days by data entry, preparation and printing 
5. Farmers awareness campaign on SHC 
250 Farmers in One months (Through training programmes, mass 
awareness campaign and use of social media etc. 
1. Soil Sampling 
25-30 representative samples of 1/2 kg (composite of 3 samples) per day 
(April-June) or (October-November) per soil survey group. 
2. Soil Sample Processing 
Drying, removing impurity/mixing/lebelling, grinding and storing 100-
150 samples/week 

 
284 
 
Soil Sample Analytical Protocol/ Method 
 
 
 
 
S. No 
Parameters 
Test Method 
Unit 
1 
pH (2% solution) at 25°C 
Glass electrode pH meter 
Number 
scale 
2 
Electrical Conductivity (2% 
Solution) at 25°C 
EC Meter 
dS/m 
3 
Organic Carbon (oven dried 
sample) 
Volumetric Method (Walkley 
and Black,1934) 
w% 
4 
Nitrogen as N 
Kjeldahl Digestion Method 
Kg/ha 
5 
Phosphate as P2O5 
Bray’s & Kurtz 1945 (For 
Acidic Soil)/ Olsen’s 1954 
Method (For Alkaline Soil) 
Kg/ha 
6 
Potassium as K2O 
Flame Photo Meter 
Kg/ha 
7 
Sulphur as ‘S’ 
Barium Sulphate Method by 
Calculation 
ppm 
8 
Zinc as ‘Zn’ oven dried sample 
Digestion Followed by AAS 
ppm 
9 
Copper as ‘Cu’ oven dried 
sample 
Digestion Followed by AAS 
ppm 
10 
Iron as ‘Fe’ oven dried sample 
Digestion Followed by AAS 
ppm 
11 
Manganese as ‘Mn’ oven dried 
sample 
Digestion Followed by AAS 
ppm 
12 
Boron as ‘B’ oven dried sample 
Digestion Followed by AAS 
ppm 
 
 
 
 
********* 
 
 

 
285 
 
Annexure- XXXVI 
 
Manual for Soil Health Card Portal 
 
 
 
 
Portal, Admin Panel  
User Guide 
 
Version 1.1 
 
 
 
 
Updated on: 01/04/2023 
 
 

 
286 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
3 
About SHC Portal 
3 
About Admin Panel: 
4 
Admin Panel 
5 
Accessing SHC Admin Panel 
5 
User Registration 
5 
User Login 
6 
User Types 
6 
STATE USER 
7 
DASHBOARD 
7 
EDIT USER PROFILE 
8 
USER MANAGEMENT - CREATE AUTHORITY 
9 
Create Authority 
9 
USER MANAGEMENT - APPROVAL & USERS LIST 
10 
TARGET ALLOCATION 
11 
SOIL HEALTH CARDS 
12 
REPORTS 
13 
CROP MANAGEMENT 
14 
Crop Details 
18 
Crop Group 
19 
FERTILIZER MANAGEMENT 
21 
GFR - Macronutrients 
21 
GFR - Micronutrients 
22 
Fertilizers 
24 
 
 

 
287 
 
INTRODUCTION 
“Soil Health Card (SHC)” Scheme is a Government of India’s scheme promoted by the 
Department of Agriculture, Co-operation & Farmers Welfare under the Ministry of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare. It is being implemented through the Department of Agriculture of various States and 
Union Territory Governments. 
A Soil Health Card gives the nutrient status of soil of Farmers land holdings, along with the fertilizers 
recommendations and soil amendments needed to maintain soil health in the long run. 
 
Soil Health Card portal is a Web based Workflow Application to generate Soil Health Cards in 
a uniform format throughout the country. It provides provision for Soil Sample Registration, Test Results 
entry, Automatic calculations of the fertilizers recommendations based on General Fertilizers 
Recommendations provided by States and finally, generation of Soil Health Card in local languages. 
 
Soil Health Card Application consists of five major modules:- 
- User Registration and its approval by State Administrator 
- Sample Registration 
- Test Result Entry by Analyst 
- Fertilizer Recommendation 
- Soil Health Card Generation 
 
This document gives detailed instructions regarding the operations of the Soil Health Card portal. 
 
About SHC Portal 
SHC Web portal is available at URL: https://soilhealth.dac.gov.in/. The soil health card portal provides 
all the information needed about the Soil Health Card Scheme. Following features are available in the 
SHC Portal: 
● Soil Maps with state-wise nutrient details 
● Scheme progress and progress of portal entry 
● Login to Admin Panel 
● Farmers corner to Track soil sample, print soil health card, fertilizer dosage for crop,  and locate 
soil testing laboratory 
● Technical documentations, Guidelines & Downloads 
● Directories & E-learning 
● Contact details 
 
About Admin Panel: 
The salient features of the SHC admin panel are: 
● Create Authorities like state, district authorities  
● Soil testing labs run by Village Level entrepreneurs (VLEs) 
● Every level of authority is managed by users. Users are assigned with a list of permissions to 
manage their roles. 
● Each authority gets assigned with a number of allotted tests to be completed before the expiry 
date. After the completion of the tests, the authority gets payment which are then paid to the low-
level authorities and Soil Testing Labs (STLs) 
● The Vendors and device manufacturer's empanelment for inclusion of their services related to 
Soil Health Card. 
● The Village Level Entrepreneurs (VLEs) need to use the soil sample collection App to perform 
the soil tests under the SHC portal.  

 
288 
 
The following sections give detailed overview and operational guidelines of the admin panel. 
Admin Panel 
 
Accessing SHC Admin Panel 
To login, enter the URL: https://soilhealth.dac.gov.in/ and click on Login button at the right-side top 
of the window, And select the Central, State, District, STLs option.                                                                                    
 
 
User Registration 
For new user registration, the user has to click the User Registration option in the Login page. New users 
need to fill in the registration form and click on the Submit button. Once the Admin approves the request, 
The user will be able to operate the login. 
 
 

 
289 
 
 
 
 
User Login 
In the login page, select your User Type, enter User Name and Password. Click on the I’m not a robot 
option and press the Sign In button. 
 
 
User Types 
● Central User 
● State User 
● District User 
● STL  
● Supervisor 
STATE USER 
DASHBOARD 
After successful login, you will see the dashboard. 

 
290 
 
 
Dashboard lets us generate region-wise, year-wise statistics as: 
● Number of STLs 
● Number of Samples Collected 
● Tests completed 
 
 
 

 
291 
 
EDIT USER PROFILE 
Click Profile under Account to edit the user profile. 
 
 
In The User Profile page, You can edit the Staff ID, Name, Address, Phone, E-mail, Department Name 
and Click on the Submit button. 
  
 
 
 
 

 
292 
 
USER MANAGEMENT - CREATE AUTHORITY 
In the organization hierarchy, the lower levels like States, Districts are termed as Authority in the admin 
panel. The Central user can create State level Authorities. State users can create District level authorities.  
Each Authority needs to be named and assigned to a geological region. Central user can create State-
level authorities. State-level users can create district-level authorities. 
 
Create Authority 
To create an authority, select User Management and click Create Authority. 
 
Enter the name of the authority and select a region from the list. Click the Submit button to create the 
authority. 
 
The new authority created is listed with details such as name of the authority, region, number of users, 
number of STLs, number of farmers and status. 
 
 

 
293 
 
USER MANAGEMENT - APPROVAL & USERS LIST 
Click on the Disable button to Disable the users and Reset Password button to change the password of 
the users. 
 
 
 
 

 
294 
 
TARGET ALLOCATION 
 
To create a test allotment, click Test Allotment under Target Allocation. 
Click on Create Test Allotment. 
 
 
Enter the number of tests to be allotted, Select the Authority under which the User is to be allotted, 
Select the User, And click on the Submit button. 
 
 
SOIL HEALTH CARDS 
To view details of soil samples collected, Click on SHC ALL under Soil Health Cards. 

 
295 
 
 
List of options available under the section: 
1. SHC (ALL) 
2. SHC Pending 
3. SHC Completed 
4. SHC Bulk upload (2023-24) 
5. Bulk Test details (2022-23) 
6. SHC Export data 
If the soil test is completed, you can view & print the soil health card using the Print button. 
 
 
 
 
REPORTS 
To generate reports click on the Report on the left-side menu. The list of reports is listed. 
 

 
296 
 
 
 
List of Reports that can be generated as below: 
Progress Report (Statewise / Districtwise / Villagewise) 
Blockwise progress report 
Portal status report 
SHC Legacy report ( Legacy SHC) 
Physical progress / Achievement 
STL wise progress report 
Agent wise samples report 
Farmer details 
SHC component progress 
  
 
 
 

 
297 
 
CROP MANAGEMENT 
CROP DETAILS 
Click on Crop Details under Crop Management. Click on the Create Crop option 
 
Select the Manual option and enter the crop details 
 
● Enter Crop name 
● Crop variety 
● Select Split crop (Yes / No) 
● Select Crop stage from the drop down 
Click on the Submit button. The added crop will be displayed in the Crop details page 

 
298 
 
 
To Bulk upload the Crop details, select File upload Radio Button 
Click on Download Sample Excel File 
Open the Excel file and fill the crop details. 
Save the excel file and click Upload File button and select the Excel file 
Click the Submit Button. The added crop will be displayed in the Crop details page.  
The crop details can be edited by clicking on the Edit option in the Crop Details page. 
 

 
299 
 
CROP GROUP 
Click on the Crop Group under Crop Management section, Click Create group option  
 
Enter the Crop group name and choose the crops from the dropdown which was created in the crop 
details section. Minimum 2 crops have to be selected to create the crop group 
Click the Submit button. 
 
The Crop groups and crop names are shown in the Crop Group page.  
You can edit the crop group by clicking on the Edit button 

 
300 
 
 
Click submit to update the crop group 
GFR - MACRO NUTRIENTS 
Click on GFR - Macronutrient option under Fertilizer Management option, and Click on  Create GFR 
option. 
 
 
User can create the GFR for a particular district or for the entire state by choosing the toggle switch 
(For all districts) 

 
301 
 
 
Choose the crop group from the dropdown, which was created in the crop management / crop group 
select the crop from the dropdown which lies under the selected crop group 
Select the unit for the GRD (General Recommended Dosage) which will be entered by the user 
Kg per Hectare 
Kg per Acre 
Kg per Tree 
Kg per Plant 
Grams per Plant 
Kg per Pit 
Grams per Pit 
Grams per Tree 
GRD unit cannot be changed once submitted 
Choose the Nitrogen fertilizer recommendation based on  
Nitrogen 
Organic Carbon 
Enter the GRD value for the N, P, K, FYM 
Select AutoFill option to calculate the range in below table 
Click on the Submit button to register the GFR - Macronutrients 

 
302 
 
Registered GFR will be displayed in the GFR page 
 
Click on Edit to modify the GFR - Macronutrients 
Follow the same procedure to update the GFR - Macronutrients. 
GRD unit cannot be edited 
Update the GRD values and select AutoFill to modify in the below table 
Click submit to update the GFR - Macronutrients 
 

 
303 
 
GFR - MICRO NUTRIENTS 
Click on the GFR - Micronutrient Fertilizer option under Fertilizer Management option Click on the 
Create GFR - Micronutrient option 
 
Select the Micronutrient from the drop down menu 
Verify the Micronutrient fertilizer name displays in the Micronutrient Application box 
 
Enter the Critical Limit value for the micronutrient (in ppm) 
Enter the recommendation value for the micronutrient 
Soil Application (kg/ha) 
Gypsum (%) 
Foliar spray (%) 
Lime (%) 
Soil Application or/and Foliar Spray value is mandatory to get the micronutrients recommendation (It 
should not be zero) 

 
304 
 
If Gypsum or/and Lime % values are not available , you can enter as zero (0)  
Click Submit to add the Micronutrient GFR 
List of added micronutrients display in the GFR - Micronutrient page 
 
User can view the added micronutrients by clicking View option 
User can edit the details of the GFR using Edit option 
Click submit button to update the fertilizer 
FERTILIZERS 
Click on the Fertilizers option under the Fertilizer  Management option. Click on the  Create Fertilizer 
option 
 
Select the fertilizer type from the drop down (Chemical) 
Select the primary nutrient of the fertilizer from the drop down 
Select the fertilizer from the drop down. If the fertilizer name is not available, kindly contact the 
support team to add the fertilizer name to the list (Only name will be added, Composition will not be 
added by the support team) 
Enter the bag capacity of the fertilizer in kgs/bags 

 
305 
 
Enter the compositions for all the parameters of the respective fertilizer 
Click Submit to save the fertilizer 
Registered Fertilizers will be displayed in the Fertilizer page 
 
User can view the entered composition and the details using view option 
User can edit the composition and other details using Edit option 
After modification, click submit to update the fertilizer details. 
 
Click on Edit option to add crops or remove the crops 
 
 
 

 
306 
 
 
 
STL 
Registered Soil Testing Laboratories in the state are listed under STL section 
List of STLs as below 
1. Static labs 
2. Mobile labs 
3. Mini labs 
4. Village level STL 
5. Private labs 
6. KVK labs 
State users can do the reset password for the STLs using the reset password option. 
 
.  
 
 
 

 
307 
 
School SHC 
To check the School SHC progress in the State, Click Dashboard under School SHC option. 
 
  
To Check the school allotment details, Click on School Management option.  
 
To check the School Soil Health Cards, Click on Soil Health Cards under, School Reports. You can 
print the soil health cards  

 
308 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
309 
 
MASTER DIRECTORY 
To manage the District Blocks and villages, Click on Local Government Directory under Master 
Directory. 
To add villages, Click on Add Village. To search for District, Block or village, enter the desired details 
and click on the Search button. 
Once searched user can edit or view the details.
 
 
 
 

 
310 
 
LOGOUT 
Click the Signout button to terminate the session. 
 
 
 
 

 
311 
 
DISTRICT USER 
DASHBOARD 
After successful login, you will see the dashboard. 
 
Dashboard lets us view the overall details such as: 
● Number of Labs Registered 
● Target Allotted 
● Number of Samples Collected 
● Tests completed 
 
 
 

 
312 
 
SOIL HEALTH CARDS 
To view details of soil samples collected, Click on SHC ALL under Soil Health Cards. 
Users can filter the soil health cards by Test ID, Saathi, Farmer Name etc. 
 
 
SHC BULK UPLOAD 2023-24 
The uploaded samples of Bulk upload 2023-24 are displayed in this option. 
Once the Saathi users verify the location, the cards can be printed, Plot can be updated and results can 
be edited. 
  
Bulk Upload (2022-23) 
To upload the samples collected in the year 2022- 23 Click on Bulk Upload (2022-23) under Soil 
Health Cards SHC option. 
Download the  Sample file By clicking on the Download Excel file option 
Fill the Sample details in the Excel file and save the file 
To upload the file Fill the Test center name and address, Click on the Upload File button and Upload 
the Excel file 
Click on the Submit button 

 
313 
 
 
 
 
 

 
314 
 
BULK TEST DETAILS (2022-23) 
To view the samples uploaded in 2022-23, Click on Bulk Test details (2022-23),  
Users can find the required sample using the Sample Number, Collected Date, Completed Date and 
Village. 
To download the soil health cards for the samples, Click on the Print option,  
To delete the Samples, Click on the Delete button. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
315 
 
REPORTS 
To generate reports click on the Report on the left-side menu. The list of reports is listed. 
 
 
 
List of Reports that can be generated as below: 
Progress Report (Villagewise) 
Blockwise progress report 
SHC Legacy report ( Legacy SHC) 
STL wise progress report 
Agent wise samples report 
Farmer details 
 
 
 

 
316 
 
STL 
To view the laboratory details of the district Click on the STL option. 
The Types of laboratories are: 
Static Lab 
Mobile Lab 
Mini Lab 
Village Level STL 
Private Labs 
KVK Labs 
To register a new lab click on the Register STL button. 
 
 
 
 
Fill out all the fields in the Registration form such as:  
District, Sub District, Village, Pincode, Address, Latitude & Longitude, Lab Name, Lab Incharge 
Name, Lab Incharge Designation etc. and click on the Submit Button. The newly created STLwill be 
displayed in the STL page. 
 
Details of the labs can be edited by clicking on the Edit button, Make the necessary changes and click 
on the Submit button. 
Labs can be Enabled or Disabled by clicking on the Enable/Disable button 
To reset the password, Click on the Reset Password button 
 
 

 
317 
 
STL USER 
DASHBOARD 
After successful login, you will see the dashboard. 
 
Dashboard lets us view the overall details such as: 
● Target Allotted 
● Number of Samples Collected 
● Tests completed 
 
EDIT USER PROFILE 
Click Profile under Account to edit the user profile. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
318 
 
SOIL HEALTH CARDS 
To view details of soil samples collected, Click on SHC ALL under Soil Health Cards. 
Users can filter the soil health cards by Test ID, Saathi, Farmer Name etc. 
To enter the results of collected samples click on Result Entry 
Te edit the results, Click on Edit Result 
To edit the Plot details, Click on Update Plot option, 
To delete the samples click on the Delete option. Samples can only be deleted prior to the Result Entry 
Once the Soil health cards are printed, Click on Mark as printed 
 
In the Result Entry page, Enter the values of the parameters and click on the Submit button. 
 
If the soil test is completed, you can view & print the soil health card using the Print button. 

 
319 
 
 
 

 
320 
 
BULK UPLOAD 2023-2024 
Bulk upload 2023-24 option is provided to upload samples that were collected offline.  
● Download the excel file and input all the farmer and sample details 
● Enter the District, Block, Village and the preferred crops and upload the file. 
● Click on the Submit button. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
321 
 
SHC BULK UPLOAD 2023-24 
The uploaded samples of Bulk upload 2023-24 are displayed in this option. 
Once the Saathi users verify the location, the cards can be printed, Plot can be updated and results can 
be edited. 
  
 
 
 

 
322 
 
BULK RESULT ENTRY 
To enter the results of Samples in Bulk, Click on Bulk Result Entry. 
Download by result sheet by village or saathi and click on Download Result Sheet 
Once the results have been entered in the excel file select the village or saathi option and upload the 
file. 
Verify the results and click on the Submit button 
 

 
323 
 
Bulk Upload (2022-23) 
To upload the samples collected in the year 2022- 23 Click on Bulk Upload (2022-23) under Soil 
Health Cards SHC option. 
Download the  Sample file By clicking on the Download Excel file option 
Fill the Sample details in the Excel file and save the file 
To upload the file Fill the Test center name and address, Click on the Upload File button and Upload 
the Excel file 
Click on the Submit button 
 
 
 

 
324 
 
 
REPORT GENERATION 
To generate reports click on the Report on the left-side menu. The list of reports is listed. 
Click on the type of report you want to generate. 
 
 
 

 
325 
 
SAATHI 
To create a Saathi user, Click on the Saathi option, and click on Create Saathi. 
To edit the saathi details, click on the Edit option 
To disable the saathis user, Click on the Disable option 
To transfer the saathi user, Click on the Transfer button 
To reset password of the saathi, Click on the Reset password option 
 
  
 
In the Create saathi page, Enter the Saathi details and click on the Submit button 
 
 
 

 
326 
 
GENERATE QR CODE 
To generate QR code, Click on Generate QR Code option and click on the Generate QR Code button. 
 
Enter the desired name and number and click on save. Once the QR code is generated, Click on Print 
button. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
327 
 
LOGOUT 
Click the Signout button to terminate the session. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
328 
 
Annexure-XXXVII 
 
Guidelines for setting up of Village Level Soil Testing Labs 
 
 
 
 
 

 
329 
 
 
 
 
 

 
330 
 
 
 
 

 
331 
 
 
 
 

 
332 
 
 
 
 

 
333 
 
 
 
 

 
334 
 
 
 
 

 
335 
 
 
 
 

 
336 
 
 
 
 

 
337 
 
 
 
 

 
338 
 
Annexure-XXXVIII 
 
Admissible items including illustrative list of equipment for setting up of Static Soil Testing 
Laboratory with annual analyzing capacity of 10,000 samples per annum (For analyzing 
NPK, secondary nutrients & micronutrients in soil and water) 
 
 
S.No 
Item 
Quantity 
1 
Inductively Coupled Plasma Spectrophotometer(ICP) 
1 
2 
Conductivity Meter 
2 
3 
pH Meter 
2 
4 
Shaking Apparatus 
2 
5 
Electronic Balance 
1 
6 
Analytical Balance/Top Loading Balance 
2 
7 
Drying Oven 
1 
8 
Computer with appropriate Software 
1 
9 
Table Top Centrifuge 
1 
10 
GPS System with Mobile Phone 
1 
11 
Miscellaneous equipments such as Distillation unit, Sieving 
system, Auto-titrators, bar code Scanner & Printer etc. 
- 
 
 
 
 
 

 
339 
 
Annexure-XXXIX 
 
 
Admissible items including illustrative list of equipment for setting up of Mobile Soil Testing 
Laboratory with annual analyzing capacity of 5,000 samples per annum (For analyzing NPK, 
secondary nutrients & micronutrients in soil and water) 
 
S.No 
Item 
Quantity 
1 
Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer 
(AAS) for MSTL 
1 
2 
Spectrophotometer 
1 
3 
Flame Photometer 
1 
4 
Conductivity Meter 
2 
5 
pH Meter 
2 
6 
Shaking Apparatus 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:  
 
Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS) for MSTL, Spectrophotometer, Flame 
Photometer, Conductivity Meter, pH Meter, Shaking Apparatus, Electronic Balance, Analytical 
Balance/Top Loading Balance, Drying Oven, Computer with appropriate Software, Table Top 
Centrifuge, GPS System with Mobile Phone, Portable Gen set of 7.5 KVA silent type, Portable 
Kit, Customized Vehicle, Miscellaneous equipments such as Distillation unit, Sieving system, 
Auto-titrators, Bar code Scanner & Printer etc 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Electronic Balance 
1 
8 
Analytical Balance/Top Loading Balance 
2 
9 
Drying Oven 
1 
10 
Computer with appropriate Software 
1 
11 
Table Top Centrifuge 
1 
12 
GPS System with Mobile Phone 
1 
13 
Portable Gen set of 7.5 KVA silent type 
1 
14 
Portable Kit 
2 
15 
Customized Vehicle 
1 
16 
Miscellaneous equipment’s such as Distillation 
unit, Sieving system, Auto-titrators, Bar code 
Scanner & Printer etc. 
- 

 
340 
 
Annexure-XL 
 
List of admissible items and equipment for Strengthening of Static/ Mobile Soil Testing 
Laboratory 
 
S. No. 
Items 
Quantity 
1 
Inductively coupled Plasma Spectrophotometer/ 
Atomic Spectrophotometer(ICP/AAS) 
1 
2 
Conductivity Meter 
1 
3 
pH Meter 
1 
4 
Shaking Apparatus 
1 
5 
Electronic Balance 
1 
6 
Analytical Balance/Top Loading balance 
1 
7 
Drying Oven 
1 
8 
Computer with appropriate Software 
1 
9 
Table Top Centrifuge 
1 
10 
GPS System with Mobile Phone 
1 
11 
Portable Gen set of 7.5 KVA silent type 
1 
12 
Miscellaneous equipments such as Distillation unit, Sieving 
System, Auto-titrators, bar code Scanner & 
Printer, etc 
- 

 
341 
 
Annexure-XLI 
 
Illustrative list of Equipments for setting up of new State Fertilizer Testing Labs 
 
 
 
S.No. 
Items 
No. 
1 
Inductively Coupled Plasma Spectrophotometer/ Atomic 
Spectrophotometer (ICP/AAS) 
1 
2 
Auto N-Analyzer 
1 
3 
Spectrophotometer 
1 
4 
Water Bath-cum-Shaker 
1 
5 
Muffle Furnace + Oven 
1 
6 
pH Meter 
2 
7 
Vacuum Pump 
2 
8 
Electronic Balance 
2 
9 
Analytical Balance 
1 
10 
Digestion/Distillation Set 
2 
11 
Karl Fisher Apparatus 
2 
12 
Deionizer 
1 
13 
Computer with appropriate Software 
1 
14 
Lab. Articles 
1 
15 
Misc. equipment’s such as Auto-titrators etc. 
- 
 
 
 

 
342 
 
Annexure-XLII 
 
Illustrative list of Equipments for Strengthening of existing State Fertilizer Quality Control 
Laboratory 
 
 
S.No. 
Items 
No. 
1 
Inductively Coupled Plasma Spectrophotometer/ Atomic 
Spectrophotometer(ICP/AAS) 
1 
2 
Auto N-Analyzer 
1 
3 
Spectrophotometer 
1 
4 
Water Bath-cum-Shaker 
1 
5 
Muffle Furnace + Oven 
1 
6 
pH Meter 
1 
7 
Vacuum Pump 
1 
8 
Electronic Balance 
1 
9 
Analytical Balance 
1 
10 
Digestion/Distillation set 
1 
11 
Karl Fisher Apparatus 
1 
12 
Deionizer 
1 
13 
Computer with appropriate Software 
1 
14 
Lab. Articles 
1 
15 
Miscellaneous equipment’s such as auto-titrators, bar code 
Scanner & Printer, etc 
- 

 
343 
 
Annexure-XLIII 
 
List of Equipments and Plant and Machinery for Setting up New Bio-fertilizer and Organic 
Fertilizer (organic manures) Quality Control Laboratory for Capacity of 1000 samples/ year 
(Essential equipments, for strain maintenance and quality control glass ware, plastic ware etc. 
 
(Rs. in lakh) 
S. No. 
Item 
Quantity 
required(No) 
Rate 
Amount 
1. 
Vertical Autoclave 600x350mm 
2 
0.8 
1.600 
2. 
Hot Air Oven 
2 
0.6 
1.200 
3. 
Refrigerator 300 lit 
1 
0.3 
0.300 
4. 
BOD In cub at or 290 lit 
2 
1.2 
2.400 
5. 
Laminar air flow work station, 
working table Size 3'x2' 
2 
1.5 
3.000 
6. 
Rotary shaker (capable of 
holding 25 no., 
flasks of 100- 500 ml capacity) 
2 
1.25 
2.500 
7. 
Binocular research micro scope 
with 
phase 
contrast 
attachment 
(MOST 
IMPORTANT) having 
turret condenser and matching phase objectives of 
10x,40x and 100x magnification, 10x wide 
field eye pieces and telescopic centering eyepiece. 
 
 
1 
 
 
2.20 
 
 
2.200 
8. 
pH Meter (Micro Processor 
based) and conductivity meter 
1 each 
0.3 
0.600 
9. 
Small oil free air compressor 
2 
0.5 
1.000 
10. Air conditioners1.5 ton split type 
4 
0.3 
1.200 
11. Miscellaneous equipments and 
tools such as colony counter, balances, micro liter 
pipettes/ Deionizer etc 
 
- 
 
LS 
 
4.000 
12. Glass ware and plastic ware aids 
 
LS 
2.500 
13. Centrifuge15,000 rpm 
1 
1.50 
1.50 
14. ICP 
1 
30 
30.00 
15. Auto N-Analyzer 
1 
10.00 
10.00 
16. Moisture analyzer 
1 
2.0 
2.0 
17. Chemicals etc. 
LS 
- 
2.50 
18. Assistance for hired manpower 
on contract 
LS 
 
10.00 
19. Computer with appropriate software 
1 
1.50 
1.500 
20. Contingencies 
LS 
- 
5.000 
Total 
85.00 
 
Note: For strengthening of existing BOQCL assistance shall be limited to Rs.45.00lakh. Any of the 
equipment’s mentioned above shall be the admissible items for strengthening. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
344 
 
Annexure-XLIV 
Rain-fed Area Development (RAD) Cost Norms 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Item 
Practices 
Proposed Cost Norms 
1. 
Integrated 
Farming 
System 
Crops 
(Millets 
Crops 
/ 
Oilseed/ 
Pulses/Vegetables/fodder) 
+ 
Trees 
(Horticulture/Agro Forestry)+Livestock 
{Milch 
cows/Buffaloes/small 
ruminants 
(10animals (Sheep or Goat or Pigs)/ 50 birds 
(Duck/ Poultry) } 
Rs.30,000/-(thirty 
thousand)   will 
be 
provided 
 to 
each
farming family for taking
up Integrated Farming
System 
as 
given 
at
S.No.1and 
at 
least
 
two activities given
at S.No.2 to 5 shall be
included depending on the
need of farm house hold,
resource available and
convergence mechanism 
identified. The assistance
 
of Rs. 30,000/-shall 
be uniform for all farmers 
irrespective of the size of
their landholding.  
2. Fishery(Fingerlings)Units 
Fisheries in ponds or Rice field 
3. 
Apiculture(Bee 
Keeping) 
One 
unit 
per 
farm 
under 
plantation/Millets/ Crops. 
4. 
Silage making for increased 
availability of green fodder 
round the year 
Construction of Silo Pit either below ground 
or above ground with provision of Chaff 
Cutter and Weighing Balance 
5. 
Vermicompost Units/organic 
input Production 
unit,
 
green 
manuring 
Construction of Vermicompost units, 
organic input production units and green 
manuring. 
6 
Capacity Building 
Monitoring and capacity building of the 
beneficiaries 
through 
Community 
Resource Persons (CRPs) under SRLM, 
Self Help Groups, Champion Farmers 
under NF program etc. 
Rs. 
10,000/- 
per 
cluster. 
7 
Formulation of projects for
Voluntary Carbon Market by
Govt. 
Agencies/Organisations 
Project based 
100% assistance to 
Government agencies/ 
organizations. 
8 
Admin Cost 
As per RKVY norms 
Note: 
(RAD should be complimented by schemes such as WDC-PMKSY, MGNREGA, NFNSM, other components 
of RKVY, National Mission on Edible Oil-Oilseeds (NMEO-OS), Mission for Integrated Development of 
Horticulture (MIDH), National Mission on Natural Farming, Sub Mission on Agricultural Extension(SMAE) 
etc. through convergence.) 

 
345 
 
Annexure-XLV 
 
Format for Annual Action Plan (AAP)of RAD 
 
The AAP format shall be prepared as given below: 
 
 
Details of Cluster/Village– 
S. 
No 
Name of 
Cluster- 
Total Area under Cluster 
Proposed Area under RAD 
In Cluster 
Nos. of Beneficiaries 
 
Implementing Agency: 
 
Total Area proposed for development: 
 
Total Nos. of Cluster: 
Total Nos .of beneficiaries: 
 
Farming System 
Area proposed 
(ha.)/ Nos. 
Number of 
Beneficiaries 
Estimated 
total Cost 
(CS+SS) 
Assistance 
Sought from 
RAD 
Integrated Farming System (ha) 
Fishery (fingerlings) Units 
Apiculture Unit 
Silage Unit 
Vermicompost 
Units/Organic 
input 
production unit, Green Manuring 
Capacity Building 
Admin Cost 
Grand Total 

 
346 
 
Annexure-XLVI 
Rainfed Area Development (RAD) Progress Reporting Format 
 
Sl. 
Activity 
Unit 
(ha/ 
nos) 
Physical 
Financial 
Approve 
d Target 
Achieveme 
nt 
Total 
cost 
Achievement 
Incurred 
Cost per 
unit(Rs.) 
Central 
Share 
State 
Share 
Total 
1 
Integrated Farming System 
(ha) 
2 
Fishery(Fingerlings) 
Units 
3 
Apiculture Unit 
4 
Silage Unit 
5 
Vermicompost Units/ 
Organic input 
production unit, Green 
Manuring 
6 
Capacity Building 
7 
Admin Cost 
Total 
 
Annexure-XLVI-A 
 
Progress reporting format for TSP and SCSP component under RAD 
 
A. Physical achievement 
 
Cluster/District 
Physical Target 
Physical Achievement 
SC 
ST 
General 
SC 
ST 
General 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
B. 
Financial Target 
Cluster/District 
Financial Target 
Financial Achievement 
SC 
ST 
General 
SC 
ST 
General 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
 
C. Average enhancement of farmer’s income: 
D. Average enhancement in cropping intensity: 
 
 

 
347 
 
Annexure-XLVII 
 
Functions of National/State/District Project Management Team (PMT) 
 
 PMT, at all levels, will provide technical backstopping and also help in monitoring of the scheme 
implementation. The responsibilities of PMTs/ experts at national/state/ district levels are as 
follows: 
 
 Design understanding of Sustainable Agriculture Systems including eco system services at 
Farm level and cluster level. 
 Design understanding of Farmer Producer Organization (FPOs) and Producer Companies 
(PCs) for value addition and marketing of surplus produce at different cluster levels (GP, 
Block and District). 
 Design of training Modules of SAS and Farmer producer Organisations (FPOs) &PCs. 
 Coordination for Convergence of resources at national, state, district and GP level. 
 Take up concurrent evaluation based on case studies in identified areas. 
 Performance Matrix development for monitoring. 
 Administration and Coordination of PKVY at respective levels. 
 Undertake publicity/information campaign to create awareness about the scheme activity 
including organizing workshops/conferences/symposium etc. 
 
 

 
348 
 
Annexure-XLVIII 
 
Essential qualifications for Support Agency 
 
 Legally registered body under relevant act for last 3 years supported with their annual reports. 
 Financially sound supported through last 3 years balance sheets 
 At least 3 years of experience in management of organic adoption and certification programmes 
(Third party or PGS) or organic farming conversion projects through experienced manpower in 
organic farming. 
 Proven track record in facilitating market linkages to their developed organic groups/ clusters. 
 Have strong in-house technical team competent in organic farm management, value addition, 
certification and marketing 
 Have experience in FPO/FPC formation and providing handholding to such organizations in their 
business management. 
 Competence in market facilitation and past record in handholding farmer groups in successful 
marketing shall be the key requirement for selection of service providers. 
 
 

 
349 
 
Annexure-XLIX 
 
Roles and Responsibilities of Support Agency 
 
 Deployment of manpower as Lead Resource Persons (LRPs) for effective implementation of 
programme. 
 One LRP shall be deployed for minimum of 100 farmers (means one LRP for 5 groups having 
100 ha area. 
 Group/ cluster formation through mobilization of interested farmers 
 Collection of basic data such as Aadhar card/ PAN card/ Voter ID card, land details and bank 
account No (for DBT), last 3 years farm history. 
 Helps in registration of local groups and ensure generation of user ID and password for data 
uploading on PGS-India website 
 Facilitate local group in data uploading and management on PGS website/ state ICT network 
(farmers details, 3 years farm history sheets, group summary sheets etc.), if local group do not 
have access to computer. 
 Ensure access of portal data to public to build trust and credibility in the system 
 Capacity building of LPs on implementation requirements and ensure implementation of all 
activities through LRPs 
 Trainings to farmers on organic farming activities, as sit in annual plan of action preparation, 
packing, marketing, logo preparation, transportation etc. 
 Helping farmers in developing suitable organic packages and guiding them on regular basis for 
optimum productivity 
 Helping farmers in adopting suitable on farm strategies for nutrient and pest management 
 Capacity building of farmers through trainings, group meetings and exposure visits on 
 Capacity building of farmers on PGS group operations, documentation, peer appraisals and 
certification decision 
 Capacity building of farmers on PGS standards implementation. 
 Capacity building of groups and clusters in institutional development/ FPO/FPC making and their 
professional management 
 Translate and print PGS paper work in local languages 
 Submission of monthly, quarterly, half yearly and annual reports 
 Facilitating market linkages-Introducing local marketing initiatives to ensure that PGS certified 
produce finds market as premium produce in local and city markets 
 Helping states in brand building activities and projecting states potential in national and 
international trade fairs with in the country. 
 
 

 
350 
 
Annexure-XLX 
 
Eligible Criteria for Regional Councils 
 
 The organisation/agency should have experts in technical, marketing, training fields 
 Should have support of atleast 10 local groups (total 50 farmers). List of farmers to be uploaded 
as per prescribed format 
 Organization should be financially sound supported by legal status ( 3 years audit report required 
 Must not have been black listed from any organization (self declaration required). 
 Proof/certificate of adequate experiences (05 years) of PGS-India/any other certification (TPS) in 
organic farming 
 Situated in the area of functioning (proposed to operate PGS-India programme) with permanent 
office and working personnel's 
 If proposed for operation in any other places other than its HQ, then address of branch offices 
will be required 
 Must have adequate infrastructure for online activity (like computer, printer, internet facility etc.) 
 
 

 
351 
 
Annexure-XLXI 
 
Roles and Responsibilities of Regional Councils as Agencies endorsing PGS Certification 
Process 
 
 State Government can select any Regional Council from the list of duly authorized RCs 
available on PGS website. Preference may be given to RCs located in the nearby areas for 
cost effectiveness 
 One RC shall be given not less than 1000 ha and not more than 3000 ha area in one state (1-
3cluster) for certification activities. 
 Physical verification of groups at least once a year, including participation in some peer 
appraisals by group for peer appraiser's competence assessment 
 Periodic checking of data being uploaded-Checking of local group summary work sheets for 
organic certification; whether complete in all respects and are maintained by groups 
 Appraisal of summary sheets and communication of compliances/ non-compliances 
 Endorsement, returning for review or denial of certification decision 
 Activate and issue Certification UID to each Local group in case of endorsement 
 Print and distribute annual organic certificates to individual farmer members 
 Coordinating RCOF, NCOF, state Government authorities for sample collection for residue 
analysis and sending to authorized testing laboratories 
 Communication of test results 
 Time to time reporting to NCOF and State Government authorities 
 
 

 
352 
 
Annexure-XLXII 
 
Roles and Responsibilities of Lead Resource Persons (LRPs) 
 
 LRPs can be chosen from the local group of farmers 
 LPs shall be the main field functionary and shall be responsible for farmer registration, 
documentation of the group members, uploading data in coordination with RC and handholding 
group members for PGS standards implementation in field, PGS documentation, group meetings 
and helping group members in Peer-appraisals. 
 Supervising PGS standards implementation, nutrient and pest management protocols, inputs 
production, purchase and use 
 Participate in peer appraisals as external member, help farmers in peer appraisal report 
preparation, summary sheet development and yields assessment 
 Coordinate with RCs for physical verification and timely data submission. 
 Submission of time to time reports to cluster coordinator 
 Providing hard data to cluster coordinator for uploading 
 
 

 
353 
 
Annexure-XLXIII 
 
Methodology for providing certification assistance to individual farmers/small farmer groups 
and large contiguous area under traditional/default organic farming 
 
1. Methodologies for individual and small group farmers will be as follows:  
 
a) States will identify the willing farmers/ groups and encourage them to register themselves for 
certification with concerned Regional Council accredited certification body under NPOP and 
farmers/ groups can approach the state authorities for enrolment or can enroll directly with 
intimation to state. 
b) Enrolled farmers/groups will have to register themselves on the Jaivik Kheti portal, once they 
are ready with scope certificate having IC-1 status. 
c) States can access the details of such farmers/ groups from Jaivik Kheti portal from time to 
time and send verified list to the PKVY national Project Monitoring Unit. Funds will be 
reimbursed directly to the Regional Councils and Certification Bodies on receipt of verified 
list from the state. Regional Councils and certification bodies can also assist the states for 
getting their farmers/ groups verified by the state. 
d) States will ensure adequate publicity and awareness to attract more and more farmers and 
small groups. 
e) Based upon state-wise registration and verification, funds will be provided as reimbursement 
directly to the RCs or certification bodies within the limit prescribed under component 14 B 
(3&4). 
f) In case if a farmer is having land less than 1.00 ha then his cost will be calculated on prorate 
basis. 
 
2. Certification of traditional/ default organic areas 
 
a) Declaration of the defined area as chemical input usage and GMO free (at least no such input 
use history in last 5 years) by state Government and/or local administration. Ban on use of all 
agro-chemicals within the identified geographical territory 
b) Adoption of organic farming policy and practices by all the farmers in the region and its 
corroboration by village councils or Gram Panchayats 
c) One-time documentation of all cultivated land and farmers and making of village wise 
clusters/ groups. Registration of village as one unit with total area and number of farmers 
d) State may constitute an experts committee comprising of members from MoA & FW, 
APEDA, NCOF and states to evaluate the organic status of the area and recommend for 
declaration of the defined area as organic. The committee will also give recommendations on 
the need for reduction or elimination of conversion period 
e) Subsequent annual inspection will be taken up by the RCs as per PGS-India peer appraisal. 
There will be single Peer appraisal of the village and uploading of village data on PGS-India 
website. 
f) Once the entire area villages are certified the entire area can be declared as organic 
g) For ensuring marketing there will be need for capturing of estimated yield, commodity-wise, 
village-wise and farmer-wise on PGS portal. 
h) Financial assistance will be provided to the Gram Panchayats or States (for hiring the resource 
agencies/ persons) for capacity building and certification facilitation @ Rs. 900/- per hal year 
for three years, as per the provisions at component 14 B (3&4).