730066/2022/INM
15

1 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Mission for Sustainable 
Agriculture (NMSA) 
 
Integrated Nutrient Management Division 
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation& Farmers Welfare 
Ministry of Agriculture& Farmers Welfare 
Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) 
730066/2022/INM
16

2 | P a g e  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) 
 
“Paramparagat Krishi Vikas  Yojana (PKVY)” a sub-component of 
Soil Health Management (SHM) scheme under National Mission of 
Sustainable 
Agriculture 
(NMSA) 
aims 
at 
development 
of 
sustainable models of organic farming through a mix of traditional 
wisdom and modern science to ensure long term soil fertility 
buildup, resource conservation and helps in climate change 
adaptation and mitigation. It primarily aims to increase soil fertility 
and thereby helps in production of healthy food through organic 
practices without the use of agro-chemicals. PKVY also aims at 
empowering farmers through institutional development through 
clusters approach not only in farm practices management, input 
production, quality assurance but also in value addition and direct 
marketing through innovative means. Participatory Guarantee 
System under PGS-India programme will be the key approach for 
quality assurance under the PKVY. The farmers will have option to 
adopt any form of organic farming in compliance of PGS-India 
standards. While adopting a system it must be ensured that the 
system adopted is compatible to the area and crop and assures 
optimum yield and provides adequate measures to manage 
nutrients, pests and diseases. Farmers will have the flexibility to 
use appropriate package of practice(s) best suited to their 
situations.   
 
2  
 
 
 
OBJECTIVES 
 
2.1 . 
To promote natural resource based integrated and climate resilient 
sustainable farming systems that ensure maintenance and increase of soil 
730066/2022/INM
17

3 | P a g e  
 
fertility, natural resource conservation, on-farm nutrient recycling and 
minimize dependence of farmers on external inputs; 
2.2 
To reduce cost of agriculture to farmers through sustainable 
integrated organic farming systems thereby enhancing farmer’s 
net income per unit of land 
2.3 To sustainably produce chemical free and nutritious food for 
human consumption. 
2.4 To protect environment from hazardous inorganic chemicals by 
adoption of ecofriendly low cost traditional techniques and 
farmer friendly technologies  
2.5 To empower farmers through their own institutional development in the 
form of clusters and groups with capacity to manage production, 
processing, value addition and certification management; 
2.6 To make farmers entrepreneurs through direct market linkages with 
local and national markets 
 
3    INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK AT NATIONAL, STATE AND DISTRICT 
LEVEL 
 
3.1. 
National Level 
3.1.1 National Advisory Committee (NAC) 
The National Advisory Committee (NAC) under Chairmanship of Secretary 
(A&C) constituted under NMSA will be the policy-formulating body giving 
overall direction and guidance to the Mission and monitor and review its 
progress and performance. It is empowered to lay down and amend 
operational guidelines other than those affecting financial pattern and Cost 
Norms. The composition of the NAC is given below: 
 
Secretary, 
Agriculture, 
Cooperation& 
Famers Welfare (AC&FW) 
Chairman 
Secretary, MOFPI 
Member 
730066/2022/INM
18

4 | P a g e  
 
Secretary, MSME 
Member 
Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor, 
DAC&FW 
Member 
Additional Secretary (INM), DAC&FW 
Member 
Additional Secretary (Panchayati Raj) 
Member 
Additional Secretary (Rural Development) Member 
Representative 
from 
Department 
of 
Agriculture Research & Education 
Member  
Joint Secretary (NHM) 
Member 
Joint Secretary (Crops) 
Member 
Joint Secretary (NRM & RFS) 
Member 
Joint Secretary (DOF) 
Member 
Joint Secretary (INM) 
Member Secretary 
Representative of State Governments 
Associate 
members 
on 
rotation basis 
 
NAC will invite 3-4 states as associated members in each meeting on rotation 
basis. NAC will meet at least once in six months. 
 
3.1.2. Executive Committee (EC): 
Executive committee will be headed by Additional Secretary (INM). 
Executive Committee (EC) will comprise of the following Members: 
Additional Secretary (INM), DAC&FW Chairman 
Joint 
Secretary 
(Department 
of 
Fertilizers) 
Member 
Joint Secretary (INM) 
Member Secretary 
Joint Secretary (MOFPI) 
Member  
Joint Secretary (MSME) 
Member  
730066/2022/INM
19

5 | P a g e  
 
Joint Secretary (Panchayati Raj) 
Member 
Joint Secretary (Rural Development) 
Member 
DDG 
(NRM), 
ICAR, 
Agriculture 
Commissioner, 
Horticulture 
Commissioner, ADC (INM), Director, 
NCOF and Director, CFQC&TI 
Expert Members 
During the Annual Action plan approval meetings , the State Secretary of 
Agriculture/ nodal department shall be co-opted as member of the E.C, 
when the State’s Action plan is taken up for approval.  
 
3.1.2.2 
EC will oversee activities of the Scheme and approve Action Plans of 
various states in accordance with the prescribed norms. 
3.1.2.3 
EC is empowered to reallocate resources across States and 
components and approve projects on the basis of approved financial 
assistance norms.  
3.1.2.4 
EC will meet at least once every quarter. 
 
3.1.3 INM Division in DAC&FW: 
3.1.3.1 
Indicate tentative provisions for each component at the beginning 
of Financial Year (March- April) to facilitate the States in preparing Annual 
Action Plan (AAP) as per the prescribed format. 
3.1.3.2 
Oversee dissemination, implementation, monitoring and evaluation 
of various interventions in the mission and provide feedback 
reports to the NAC and EC. 
3.1.3.3 
Ensure timely release of funds as per the annual action plans and 
monitor utilization status of funds. 
3.1.3.4 
Provide overall policy guidelines for the scheme. 
3.1.3.5 
Prepare the Agenda for the EC and NAC meetings. 
3.1.3.6 
In order to cater to the diversified requirements of the scheme in 
an efficient and time bound manner, INM Division will engage a 
730066/2022/INM
20

6 | P a g e  
 
Project Management Team. 
 
3.1.4 National Centre of Organic Farming (NCOF) 
3.1.4.1 
NCOF being the secretariat for PGS-India programme shall be the 
monitoring body for PGS certification programme including authorization of 
RCs, selection of NABL accredited labs and random surveillance through the 
RCOFs 
3.1.4.2 
Technical trainings to state Government officers on organic crop 
and livestock management as per PGS standards 
3.1.4.3 
Monitoring of functioning of Support agencies. 
3.1.4.4 
Monitor implementation of the scheme in states 
3.1.4.5 
Management and maintenance of data, MIS development, report 
generation and digital surveillance on group activities on PGS certification 
3.1.4.6 
Any other monitoring and surveillance activity assigned by the 
DAC&FW 
 
3.1.5 National Project Management Team: Project Management Team (PMT) 
constituted at the National level will function under the leadership of the JS 
(INM). Consultants in organic farming management, PGS certification and agri-
marketing as programme Manager, Senior Programmers, Technical Assistants, 
and supporting staff will form part of the PMT. The functions of the PMT are as at 
Annexure I. 
 
3.2 
State Level 
3.2.1 State Department of Agriculture or agency nominated/authorised by the 
state government shall be the nodal Department for implementation of this 
scheme.  
730066/2022/INM
21

7 | P a g e  
 
 
3.2.2 Functions of the State Department: 
3.2.2.1. 
Prepare annual State Level Action Plan by compiling District-wise 
Action Plan and submit to the State Level Executive Committee (SLEC) 
for approval and there after forward the same to EC 
3.2.2.2. 
Receive funds from DAC&FW for implementation and oversee its 
implementation, regular monitoring & review of programmes. Facilitate 
monitoring by INM Division/ NCOF/RCOFs 
3.2.2.3. 
Where the programme is implemented by the State Departments, it 
must be ensured that the aim of market linkages to clusters is properly 
implemented and farmers are linked to the market before the closure of 
the programme. 
3.2.2.4. 
Selection of support agencies (if not implementing on its own) through 
the state determined process in an open and transparent manner. 
3.2.2.5. 
Release of fund to support agencies as per work progress and release 
of funds to farmers/ accounts of farmers groups as DBT. 
3.2.2.6. 
Organize workshops, seminars and training programmes for all 
interest groups/stakeholders at State/District level. 
3.2.2.7. 
Operationalize Information Communication Technology (ICT) enabled 
management system up to grass-root level. 
3.2.2.8. 
Supervise all activites related to implementation of plan, monitoring 
etc. 
3.2.2.9. 
Conduct independent evaluation to assess the performance of scheme 
in their States. 
3.2.2.10. Two percent (2%) of total allocation to the State may be earmarked for 
administrative and other contingent expenses. Expenditure in excess of 
2% limit will be met by the States from their own resources.  
3.2.2.11. The State Government and other designated implementing agencies, to 
the extent possible, will ensure active participation of the Panchayati 
Raj Institutions (PRIs) in the implementation of this scheme 
730066/2022/INM
22

8 | P a g e  
 
3.2.2.12. State Government may involve PRIs in publicising the demonstrations 
and training of farmers and in ensuring participation of farmers from 
nearby areas for widespread dissemination of technology. 
3.2.2.13. States may prefer Women farmers / Women Self Help Groups formed 
under Ministry of Rural Development while choosing the organic 
farming areas. 
3.2.2.14. States may also take the services of FPOs, SME(s) and convergence 
with other government schemes to create end-to-end value- chain 
based cluster models (of 500 to 1000 ha area each) with effective and 
functional marketing channels.   
 
3.2.3. The State Level Executive Committee (SLEC): 
Agriculture 
Production 
Commissioner/Principal 
Secretary Government 
Chairman 
Commissioner (Agriculture)/ Director (Agriculture) 
Member Secretary 
Commissioner (Horticulture)/ Director (Horticulture) 
Member 
Commissioner (Panchayati Raj) 
Member 
Commissioner (Rural Development) 
Member 
Representatives 
of 
SAUs/ICAR//NCOF/other 
line 
Departments 
Expert Members 
Lead Farmers   
Expert Members 
 
The above SLEC is only indicative. States can choose to set up their own 
SLEC/already existing structures as per the need and availability under 
information to GoI. 
3.2.3.1. 
The SLEC will oversee the implementation of scheme’s components of 
the respective States through regular meetings with the nodal and other 
730066/2022/INM
23

9 | P a g e  
 
line Departments. It will also provide inputs to the Executive Committee 
for appropriate policy formulation and post facto approval, if required.   
3.2.3.2. 
State level Executive Committee shall approve the Annual Action Plan 
prepared by the State nodal Department/authorized agency. The SLEC 
will oversee the implementation of scheme components of the 
respective States through regular meetings with the nodal and other line 
Departments. The project prepared by state government must be duly 
approved by SLEC before submission to EC.   
3.2.3.3. 
State Project Management Team (PMT): States can engage consultants, 
technical assistants at state and district level having technical and 
administrative expertise for providing technical guidance and effective 
monitoring of the scheme implementation. States can decide the 
number based on their requirements at State and District lavel. Financial 
support for the same will be obtained from 2% administrative costs 
provided to the States.  
 
3.2.4.  Support Agencies: States can implement the programme through their 
own staff or can engage /outsource programme implementation through 
professional support agencies 
 
3.2.4.1. 
Support agencies shall be required for the following two fold functions:  
 
3.2.4.1.1. Implementation of Cluster formation, capacity building including 
exposure visits, trainings, deployment of manpower in the form of Lead 
Resource 
Persons 
(LRPs), 
management 
of 
entire 
programme 
implementation including data management, handholding to groups and 
clusters, facilitating value addition and marketing of PGS certified 
produce.  
730066/2022/INM
24

10 | P a g e  
 
3.2.4.1.2.  PGS Certification endorsement, physical verification and issue of 
certificates including sample collection and analysis for residue 
analysis.  
3.2.4.1.3. While any support agency fulfilling the prescribed criteria/qualifications 
can take up the functions as listed at (A), States shall engage already 
registered Regional Councils (RCs) for functions as listed at (B).   
3.2.4.1.4. In order to implement organic integrity, in such  clusters, where a RC is 
selected as the support agency for functions of Part (A), they will make 
sure that another RC shall have to undertake their certification or 
functions of Part (B). 
3.2.4.1.5. Essential qualifications for support agency are  at ANNEXURE II 
3.2.4.1.6. Roles and responsibilities of Support agency in detail is at ANNEXURE 
III 
3.2.4.1.7. Eligible criteria  of Regional Councils  is at  ANNEXURE lV 
3.2.5. Roles and Responsibilities of Regional Councils  
a. as supporting agency will be as specified at ANNEXURE lll  
b. as agency endorsing PGS certification process is provided  at ANNEXURE 
V 
c. Roles and Responsibilities of LRPs is  at ANNEXURE Vl 
 
3.2.6. District Level 
3.2.6.1. 
The indicative structure for District Level Executive Committee 
(DLEC) is as follows; states can choose their own setup under intimation to GoI 
 
DISTRICT LEVEL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 
Collector 
Chairman 
Joint Director/Deputy Director (Agriculture) 
Member Secretary 
District Agriculture/Horticulture/Soil Conservation 
officer 
Member 
Representative of (PR, RD, Health, Education of 
others) 
Member 
730066/2022/INM
25

11 | P a g e  
 
Representatives 
of 
SAUs/ 
KVKs/ 
other 
line 
Departments 
Expert Members 
 
3.2.7. DISTRICT LEVEL PROJECT MANAGEMENT TEAM: DPMT will be set up for 
implementation and monitoring of programme at District level. 
 
3.3. 
CRITERIA 
 3.3.1.  
For selection of areas/ Farmers’ groups: 
3.3.1.1. Organic farming under PKVY will be promoted preferably in 
hilly, tribal and rain-fed areas.  
3.3.1.2. Cluster approach will be adopted in large patches of up to 
1000 ha area in plan areas and 500 ha area in hilly areas. 
 
3.3.1.3. Cluster chosen shall be in contiguous patch, as far as 
possible, may be extending over few adjacent villages (but 
not over large areas in sparsely distributed villages). 
3.3.1.4. Formation of Gram Panchayat based Farmer Producer 
Organizations will be encouraged or already existing FPOs 
will be promoted under the scheme. 
3.3.1.5. In a cluster, there should be maximum number of small and 
marginal farmers. Women farmers/ SHGs should be given 
preference. 
3.3.1.6. Success in marketing shall be one of the key component 
taken up for outcome evaluation along with other indicators 
such as soil health improvement, reduction in cost of 
cultivation etc. 
 
3.3.2. For allocation of funds to States:  
3.3.2.1. Timely submission of quarterly reports on financial (fund 
utilization/submission of Utilization Certificates) and physical 
progress (area, crop details) reports. 
3.3.2.2. Effective use of existing FPOs convergence with other schemes, 
730066/2022/INM
26

12 | P a g e  
 
adoption of innovative value addition and marketing strategies will 
be considered while allocating the funds.   
 
4 PROCEDURE AND TIMELINES FOR SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF 
ANNUAL ACTION PLANS 
 
4.1. 
The tentative allocation for the states for the next financial year will 
be intimated by INM division by end of February every year.  
4.2. 
State Government will prepare cluster wise annual action plan on a 
project basis with details of area to be taken up in each cluster; 
organic farming system/ cropping systems to be adopted; sources of 
organic inputs (on-farm/off-farm); possible surplus produce for 
marketing; value addition requirement marketing strategy along with 
details of agencies involved, by first week of April every year. 
4.3. 
This Annual Action Plan (AAP) duly approved by SLEC along with the 
minutes of SLEC, shall reach DAC&FW for examination, deliberation 
and final approval by first week of April every year. Post facto 
approvals from SLSC can also be considered to facilitate the 
approvals of SLEC in time.  
4.4. 
INM Division in DAC&FW will examine AAP before it is placed before 
the EC for consideration and sanction of AAP. Action plans will be 
approved by EC by April and shall be intimated to States. 
4.5. 
 Funds will be released to States by 1st week of May every year. 
 
5 FUND FLOW MECHANISM 
 
5.1 
Funds will be released to states after approval of annual action plan by 
national Executive Committee in May of each year. 
5.2 
Incentives to farmers for organic conversion, organic inputs, on-farm 
input production infrastructure etc shall be provided as Direct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT) to their respective bank accounts of farmers/ group of farmers. States 
730066/2022/INM
27

13 | P a g e  
 
may define the policy guidelines for utilization of such funds, but it will be the 
choice of the farmers to select the input/ input production infrastructure. 
5.3 
States/ Implementing agencies will furnish utilization certificate (UC) in 
the prescribed format (Form GFR 19-A) and physical & financial progress 
report containing physical and financial targets of the previous grants-in-aid, 
along with State share, before requesting for release of subsequent instalment. 
5.4 
All implementing agencies are required to maintain subsidiary accounts 
of the grants-in-aid and get the same audited from a Chartered Accountant. 
5.5.     Grants in aid will be released as per provisions regarding release of 
funds contained in GFR 2017 and instruction issued in thois regard by 
Government of India from time to time. 
5.6. 
The project is to be executed over a period of 3 years, every year audited 
report (GFR 19-A) duly signed by Chattered Accountant along with physical 
report is to be submitted to DAC&FW, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare, Govt. of India. State that requires additional time to implement the 
project, beyond 3 years may seek prior permission before the end of the 
project period during first 2 years subject to the condition that they should not 
exceed the overall per hectare and per farmer cost ceilings. 
5.7. 
As far as possible, all the activities should be funded through PKVY as 
per guidelines.  Convergence with other schemes like RKVY, MIDH, NFSM etc. 
of the DAC&FW and schemes of other ministries like MSME, MOFPI for value 
addition, marketing can be done.  
5.8 
 Funds for certification reimbursement under individual farmers and 
small farmer groups away from PKVY clusters will be provided as 
reimbursement directly to the certification agencies within the ceiling 
prescribed at S. No. 15-B (3&4) of these guidelines. Funds for this component 
will be released from the funds available under the scheme under major Head 
2401. 
5.9 Funds for certification reimbursement for large contiguous traditional/ 
default organic area will be released to the states on submission of annual 
action plan 
730066/2022/INM
28

14 | P a g e  
 
6 MODEL CLUSTER DEMONSTRATION 
6.1. 
For model cluster demonstration, proposals will be considered on 
case to case basis. Cooperatives/public sector organizations such as KVKs, 
ICAR institutions, SAUs, Central Agriculture Universities, Small Farmers 
Agri Consortium (SFAC), NSC, NCDC, and other public sector organizations 
of Central and State Governments will be eligible for conducting the model 
cluster demonstrations. Monitoring of the same will be done by INM division 
and /or NCOF through RCOFs. The funding pattern will be 100% grant from 
central government for central agencies. Upto 5% of PKVY fund will be 
allocated at DAC level for funding these demonstrations. 
6.2. 
In case of private agencies/organizations, only those having 
experience in organic farming and registered with NCOF or 
Darpan of Niti Aayog will be considered on a case to case basis.  
However, at least 10% of the total project cost shall be 
contributed by them for the implementation of Model Organic 
Cluster Demonstration. 
7 MONITORING AND EVALUATION 
 
7.1. 
At the national level regular monitoring of the scheme will be 
done by NCOF, RCOFs and National Project Management Team. 
Monitoring formats will be developed for the same.  
7.2. 
At State and district levels also the Project Management Teams 
engaged will do regular monitoring of the implementation of the 
scheme.  
7.3. 
Information and communication technology will be deployed 
extensively for ensuring transparency in the implementation 
process and effective monitoring of the programme. 
7.4. A dedicated MIS will be developed to capture the information from 
planning of project, approval, execution to progress report. 
7.5. States will send quarterly progress reports to MIS and in hard 
730066/2022/INM
29

15 | P a g e  
 
copy also. 
7.6. Geo-tagging: The clusters taken up under PKVY will be geo 
tagged for monitoring purpose as well as for facilitating 
marketing mechanism based as the crops grown. 
7.7. DAC&FW will evaluate efficacy of this Scheme through a "third 
party". The agency will assess the efficacy, performance, 
outcome and shortcomings of the Scheme and recommend 
suitable corrective measures. Concurrent, midterm and final 
evaluations will be conducted by DAC to incorporate midterm 
corrections and final evaluation of the scheme implementation. 
7.8. States shall also take up third party based concurrent, midterm 
and final evaluations from time to time.   
 
8 
 
 
 
JAIVIK KHETI PORTAL 
A dedicated   portal for organic farming acting as both a knowledge platform 
as well as marketing platform will be developed. Details of farmers involved in 
Organic farming, input supplier, certification agency (PGS), and marketing 
agencies will be available for smooth implementation from production to 
marketing. PKVY/PGS groups can take the advantage of this portal for 
capacity building, technical know-how, communicating with marketing 
channels/ other groups and direct marketing of their produce to prospective 
buyers and consumers. 
9  
 
 
 
CONVERGENCE 
Convergence with other Central Sector Schemes like MIDH, NFSM and with 
schemes of other ministries like MOFPI, SMES, MoRD etc. for relevant 
components is highly encouraged. 
 
10  
 
FORMATION OF GROUP AND CLUSTERS 
 
10.1. Formation of Groups: A group of farmers having a total area of 20 ha, in as 
730066/2022/INM
30

16 | P a g e  
 
far as possible, in contiguous patch within a village or closely located villages 
shall be considered a PKVY/PGS Group. A group shall comprise minimum 20 
farmers (may be more if individual holdings are less). All PGS group 
requirements for PGS certification shall be taken up by this group (called local 
group in PGS manual). 25-50 such groups covering 500-1000 ha area shall 
constitute one “Cluster”. 
10.2. Formation of Clusters: State Government shall identify the target PKVY/PG 
Groups between 500 or 1000 ha area for formation of clusters. The group of 
clusters should be identified preferably in the existing FPO areas. Creation of new 
FPOs can also be taken up provided such FPO formation is funded through 
convergence of resources of State Government, NABARD, SFAC, DAY-NRLM. 
Most importantly while selecting Group of clusters, contiguous area upto 1000 ha 
should be selected in nearby villages so as to generate marketable surplus for 
processing and marketing. 
10.3. PKVY farmer organizations in respective clusters shall initiate 
necessary activities for formation of FPO for all postharvest activities 
such as collection and aggregation of produce, primary processing 
including washing, cleaning, grading, packing and branding & 
marketing of the organic produce within six months of cluster 
formation. 
10.4. Farmers in a group can avail benefit to a maximum of two ha as per 
provision of PKVY, however the entire land of farmer could be allowed 
in the cluster without extending any additional support to the rest of the 
area and the same can be facilitated by the service provider for 
certification by the group and endorsed by the Regional Council without 
any extra cost involvement for data management and certification.  
10.5. For mobilization of farmers in groups and clusters, their capacity 
building, 
day-to-day 
handholding 
in 
standards 
implementation, 
assisting farmers in peer appraisal and documentation and data 
management and data uploading supporting agencies shall deploy 
730066/2022/INM
31

17 | P a g e  
 
Local Resource Persons. 
10.6. In cases where individual willing farmers or small farmer groups are 
interested to join the scheme and are located at distance from new/ 
existing PKVY clusters or large farmers that have not been included in 
the groups, then such farmers will also be considered as an extension 
of the group/ clusters and will be supported only for certification under 
component 14-B (3 & 4) PGS Certification through Regional Councils. 
Farmers will also be free to adopt third party certification under NPOP. 
States need to ensure that such farmers are taken into consideration 
for capacity building activities and market linkages. Methodology for 
providing certification assistance to such farmers is given at Annexure 
VII. 
10.7. In cases where states are willing to bring traditionally organic/ default 
organic area (such as in hills, islands or in tribal or desert belt) without 
any crop/ commodity focus and want to declare the entire identified 
traditional organic areas as organic with certification, then all the 
farmers in the contiguous area in a village shall be considered as 
cluster. Such clusters will be supported only for certification under the 
component, 14-B (3 & 4) PGS Certification through Regional Councils.  
States need to ensure that such farmers are taken into consideration for 
capacity building activities and market linkages. As a special case, 
besides traditional/default organic area, large contiguous area (whole 
state or districts) already certified may also be considered for grant of 
assistance under LAC scheme of PKVY on case to case basis, provided 
other requirements of LAC are fulfilled. State may choose the type of 
certification under LAC as per its requirement (NPOP or PGS), but the 
assistance will be limited to the ceiling prescribed in PKVY at 
component 14B (3 & 4). Methodology for providing certification 
assistance to such large contiguous clusters is given at Annexure VII. 
 
730066/2022/INM
32

18 | P a g e  
 
11  
 
 
 
CAPACITY BUILDING 
11.1. After formation of a cluster, state Government in consultation with Support 
agency shall draw up a strategy for capacity building of farmers on organic farm 
management, organic input production and use, organic approaches for pest 
management, adoption of PGS standards in field practices, PGS certification 
procedures at group level documentation requirements for PGS and peer 
appraisal procedures through trainings, exposure visits and on-hand data 
management systems for data uploading.  
11.2. Every year a minimum of 3 trainings shall be done at a cluster level, 
covering all the groups. In cases, where cluster is spread over large area (as in 
hills), trainings may be done at group level comprising members from 3 groups. 
In first year farmers shall also be exposed to PGS certification systems through 
exposure visits to existing PGS groups. 
11.3. For mobilization of farmers in groups and clusters, their capacity building, 
day-to-day handholding in standards implementation, assisting farmers in peer 
appraisal and documentation and data management and data uploading Local 
Resource Persons (LRPs) shall be deployed.  
11.4. 
Training of Officers /Executives of PKVY Team: Officers/Executives of 
PKVY Team, members of PMUs at different levels, and Regional Councils, to be 
trained on Sustainable Agriculture System and Governance Management of 
FPOs/PCs. 
 
12 
  
 
INCENTIVES TO FARMERS 
12.1. For organic conversion and on-farm and off-farm inputs 
12.1.1. 
Financial assistance to farmers shall be provided as incentive for 
eco-system service and for procurement/ management of organic 
inputs. Necessary funds under the head shall be released directly to the 
farmer beneficiaries as Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) in their bank 
accounts. 
730066/2022/INM
33

19 | P a g e  
 
12.1.2. 
On-farm inputs can be like composting, green manuring etc. and Off-
farm inputs like organic seeds, manures, vermicomposts, biofertilizers, 
biopesticides, neem formulations, PROM, waste decomposer, botanical 
and physical and biological plant protection agents etc. can be 
considered.  
12.1.3. 
States can issue necessary guidelines and suggest inputs as 
recommendatory measures. Farmers can choose inputs out of the 
recommendations as per their choice. In any case farmers should not be 
forced to buy the recommended inputs by the implementation 
Department and professional support agencies. Farmers will also be 
free to utilize the assistance fully for creation of on-farm input 
production infrastructure. 
12.2. For marketing, common packaging, branding, space rent, transport –  
12.2.1. 
Financial assistance will be given for direct marketing by the groups 
and clusters including procuring common packing material, printing of packing 
material, brochures, leaflets, preparation of labels, holograms, transportation 
expenses to local markets, hiring spaces on rent for specific organic markets and 
branding of organic products. 
12.2.2.  
PGS India Green logo may be used for area under conversion and 
PGS India Organic logo may be used for completely converted organic area. 
Regional Council/ service providers in consultation with the State Governments 
will design the label and branding for the clusters. The labeling must include 
name of cluster, district and unique product packing used for branding organic 
produce. 
12.2.3. 
If required for marketing, States can adopt any mode of certification 
as required by the buyer within the allocated budget. 
 
12.2. For Value addition infrastructure creation through FPC/FPO: 
12.3.1. 
Clusters can develop their own post-harvest, value addition and 
processing facilities, preferably under their institutions such as FPOs/ FPCs for 
creation of facilities for following: 
730066/2022/INM
34

20 | P a g e  
 
12.3.2. 
Creation of collection and aggregation/postharvest process center 
(one between every 5-10 groups) 
12.3.3. 
Creation of storage facility 
12.3.4. 
Transportation infrastructure/ costs 
12.3.5. 
Cold store/ pack house 
12.3.6. 
Processing unit for drying, grinding, milling, packaging etc. 
12.3.7. 
Any other facility deemed necessary for completing value chain. 
12.3.8. 
Financial assistance to meet the expenses for procuring processing 
units, storage, grading, packaging, branding, labeling, transportation, 
market linkage with FPO/ SME including the cost of organic fare to be 
provided on submission of appropriate proposal to the EC on case by 
case basis. 
 
12.4. Brand building, trade fairs, exhibitions, local publicity, organic fairs/ melas, 
local marketing initiatives, participation in national trade fairs: 
12.4.1. 
States in consultation with service providers shall draw a 
comprehensive marketing strategy and plan at state level for brand building of 
state specific organic products. Cluster leaders can also be exposed to national 
and international trade fairs within the country, running publicity campaign etc.  
12.4.2. 
State Governments can also hire spaces in high end markets during 
weekends for promotion of PGS certified organic produce and can organize state 
level exhibitions, trade fairs and seminars/ conferences far facilitating direct 
market linkages with retail chains. 
12.4.3. 
Setting up of Integrated Processing Unit is linked with the area 
already brought under organic farming or is proposed for conversion to organic. 
It must be ensured that adequate raw material is available from grower groups in 
close vicinity.  
12.4.4. 
It also to be ensured that facilities are created in such a way that 
different commodity can be processed under single roof facility and the unit can 
run for at least 8- 10 months a year.  
730066/2022/INM
35

21 | P a g e  
 
12.4.5. 
These projects should be preferably Farmer institutions driven or 
under Private and farmer Institution partnership mode and are established mainly 
to cater the value addition requirement of the PKVY cluster produce.  
12.4.6. 
Funds under this component will be provided on specific proposal 
on case by case basis by DAC&FW. 
 
13 
CONSULTATION WITH LEAD FARMERS 
Consultations/Seminars with the lead farmers of different sustainable agriculture 
Systems will be organized at Regional Level and National level from time to time. 
2% administrative costs available at national level will be utilised for this purpose.  
 
 
 
 
 
730066/2022/INM
36

22 | P a g e  
 
14 
FINANCIAL BREAK UP AND COMPONENT WISE ALLOCATION 
 
S.N
o. 
Component 
Pattern of 
assistance/ ha 
Total 
per ha 
area for 
3 years 
Total per 
group of 
20 ha for 
3 year 
Total per 
cluster of 
1000 ha each 
Rs in lakh 
1st 
Year 
2nd 
Year 
3rd 
Year 
A. 
Programme implementation through Support 
Agencies 
 
 
 
1. 
Cluster formation and 
Capacity building including 
exposure visits, and 
trainings of field 
functionaries 
1000 
1000 
1000 
3000 
60000 
30.00 
2. 
Deployment of manpower 
and management cost for 
implementation of 
programme including data 
management and uploading 
1500 
1500 
1500 
4500 
90000 
45.00 
B. 
PGS Certification through Regional Councils 
 
 
3. 
Service charges to RCs for 
physical verification, 
certification endorsement 
and certificate issue 
700 
700 
700 
2100 
42000 
21.00 
4. 
Residue analysis through 
Zonal councils/ state 
Departments in NABL 
accredited laboratories @ 3 
samples/per 100 hec. (LRP 
area)  from 2nd year 
0 
300 
300 
600 
12000 
6.00 
C. 
Incentive to farmers through DBT 
0 
0 
5. 
Incentive to farmers for 
organic conversion, inputs, 
on-farm input infrastructure 
to be provided as DBT for 
direct farmers account 
12000 
10000 
9000 
31000 
620000 
310.00 
D. 
Value addition, marketing and publicity 
0 
0 
6. 
Support for marketing, 
0 
500 
1000 
1500 
30000 
15.00 
730066/2022/INM
37

23 | P a g e  
 
S.N
o. 
Component 
Pattern of 
assistance/ ha 
Total 
per ha 
area for 
3 years 
Total per 
group of 
20 ha for 
3 year 
Total per 
cluster of 
1000 ha each 
Rs in lakh 
1st 
Year 
2nd 
Year 
3rd 
Year 
common packaging, 
branding, space rent, 
transportetc 
7. 
Value addition infrastructure 
creation through FPC/ FPO 
case to case basis* 
0 
1000 
1000 
2000 
40000 
20.00 
8. 
Brand building, trade fairs, 
exhibitions, local publicity, 
organic fairs/ melas, local 
marketing initiatives, 
participation in national 
trade fairs 
1300 
2000 
2000 
5300 
106000 
53.00 
 
Total 
16500 
17000 
16500 
50000 
1000000 
500.00 
Rs 500.00 lakh per cluster of 1000 ha each 
* Proposals regarding Value addition infrastructure creation through FPC/FPO would be 
considered separately on case to case basis 
Inter component changes under prior intimation to Government of India on a case to 
case with full justification is allowed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
730066/2022/INM
38

24 | P a g e  
 
ANNEXURE I 
 
FUNCTIONS OF NATIONAL/STATE/DISTRICT PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT TEAM (PMT) 
 PMT, at all levels, will provide technical backstopping and also help in 
monitoring of the scheme implementation. The responsibilities of PMTs/ 
experts at national/state/ district levels are as follows: 
 Design understanding of Sustainable Agriculture Systems including eco system 
services at Farm level and cluster level. 
 Design understanding of Farmer Producer Organization (FPOs) and Producer 
Companies (PCs) for value addition and marketing of surplus produce at 
different cluster levels (GP, Block and District). 
 Design of training Modules of SAS and Farmer producer Organisations (FPOs) & 
PCs. 
 Coordination for Convergence of resources at national, state, district and GP 
level. 
 Take up concurrent evaluation based on case studies in identified areas. 
 Performance Matrix development for monitoring. 
 Administration and Coordination of PKVY at respective levels. 
 Undertake publicity/information campaign to create awaren3ss about the scheme 
activity including organizing workshops/conferences/symposium etc. 
 
730066/2022/INM
39

25 | P a g e  
 
ANNEXURE II 
 
                              Essential qualifications for   Support Agency 
 
 Legally registered body under relevant act for last 3 years supported with 
their annual reports  
 Financially sound supported through last 3 years balance sheets 
 At least 3 years of experience in management of organic adoption and 
certification programmes (Third party or PGS) or organic farming 
conversion projects through experienced manpower in organic farming. 
 Proven track record in facilitating market linkages to their developed 
organic groups/ clusters. 
 Have strong in-house technical team competent in organic farm 
management, value addition, certification and marketing 
 Have experience in FPO/FPC formation and providing handholding to 
such organizations in their business management. 
 Competence in market facilitation and past record in handholding farmer 
groups in successful marketing shall be the key requirement for selection 
of service providers. 
730066/2022/INM
40

26 | P a g e  
 
ANNEXURE III 
Roles and Responsibilities of Support Agency  
 
 Deployment of manpower as Lead Resource Persons (LRPs) for effective 
implementation of programme. 
  One LRP shall be deployed for minimum of 100 farmers (means one LRP 
for 5 groups having 100 ha area).  
 Group/ cluster formation through mobilization of interested farmers 
 Collection of basic data such as Aadhar card/ PANcard/ Voter ID card, 
land details and bank account No (for DBT), last 3 years farm history. 
 Helps in registration of local groups and ensure generation of user ID and 
pasword for data uploading on PGS-India website  
 Facilitate local group in data uploading and management  on PGS 
website/ state ICT network ( farmers details, 3 years farm history sheets, 
group summary sheets etc.), if local group donot have access to computer 
 Ensure access of portal data to public to build trust and  credibility in the 
system 
 Capacity building of LRPs on implementation requirements and ensure 
implementation of all activities through LRPs  
 Trainings to farmers on organic farming activites, assit in annual plan of 
action preparation, packing, marketing, logo preparation, transportation 
etc. 
 Helping farmers in developing suitable organic packages and guiding 
them on regular basis for optimum productivity  
 Helping farmers in adopting suitable on farm strategies for nutrient and 
pest management 
 Capacity building of farmers through trainings, group meetings and 
exposure visits on  
 Capacity building of farmers on PGS group operations, documentation, 
peer appraisals and certification decision 
 Capacity building of farmers on PGS standards implementation. 
730066/2022/INM
41

27 | P a g e  
 
 Capacity building of groups and clusters in institutional development/ 
FPO/FPC making and their professional management 
 Translate and print PGS paper work in local languages 
 Submission of monthly, quarterly, half yearly and annual reports 
 Facilitating market linkages-Introducing local marketing initiatives to 
ensure that PGS certified produce finds market as premium produce in 
local and city markets 
 Helping states in brand building activities and projecting states potential in 
national and international trade fairs with in the country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
730066/2022/INM
42

28 | P a g e  
 
ANNEXURE lV 
                     Eligible Criteria for Regional Councils 
 
 The organisation/agency  should have experts in technical, marketing, training 
fields 
 Should have support of atleast 10 local groups (total 50 farmers).  List of farmers 
to be uploaded as per prescribed format 
 Organization should be financially sound supported by legal status ( 3 years audit 
report required 
 Must not have been black listed from any organization (self declaration required). 
 Proof/certificate of adequate experiences (05 years) of PGS-India/any other 
certification (TPS) in organic farming 
 Situated in the area of functioning (proposed to operate PGS-India programme) 
with permanent office and working personnel’s 
 If proposed for operation in any other places other than its HQ, then address of 
branch offices will be required 
 Must have adequate infrastructure for online activity (like computer, printer, 
internet facility etc.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
730066/2022/INM
43

29 | P a g e  
 
ANNEXURE V 
Roles and Responsibilities of Regional Councils as Agencies endorsing PGS 
Certification Process 
 State Government can select any Regional Council from the list of duly 
authorized RCs available on PGS website. Preference may be given to RCs 
located in the nearby areas for cost effectiveness 
 One RC shall be given not less than 1000 ha and not more than 3000 ha 
area in one state (1-3cluster) for certification activities. 
 Physical verification of groups at least once a year, including participation in 
some peer appraisals by group for peer appraiser’s competence 
assessment 
 Periodic checking of data being uploaded-Checking  of local group 
summary work sheets for organic certification; whether  complete in all 
respects and are maintained by groups 
 Appraisal of summary sheets and communication of compliances/ non-
compliances 
 Endorsement, returning for review or denial of certification decision 
 Activate and issue Certification UID to each Local group  in case of 
endorsement 
 Print and distribute annual organic  certificates to individual farmer members 
 Coordinating RCOF, NCOF, state Government authorities for sample 
collection for residue analysis and sending to authorized testing laboratories 
 Communication of test results 
 Time to time reporting to NCOF and State Government authorities 
 
730066/2022/INM
44

30 | P a g e  
 
ANNEXURE Vl  
 Roles and Responsibilities of Lead Resource Persons (LRPs) 
 
 LRPs can be chosen from the local group of farmers 
 LRPs shall be the main field functionary and shall be responsible for farmer 
registration, documentation of the group members, uploading data in 
coordination with RC and handholding group members for PGS standards 
implementation in field, PGS documentation, group meetings and helping 
group members in Peer-appraisals. 
 Supervising PGS standards implementation, nutrient and pest management 
protocols, inputs production, purchase and use 
 Participate in peer appraisals as external member, help farmers in peer 
appraisal report preparation, summary sheet development and yields 
assessment 
 Coordinate with RCs for physical verification and timely data submission. 
 Submission of time to time reports to cluster coordinator 
 Providing hard data to cluster coordinator for uploading 
730066/2022/INM
45

31 | P a g e  
 
Annexure VII 
 
Methodology 
for 
providing 
certification 
assistance 
to 
individual 
farmers/small farmer groups and large contiguous area under traditional / 
default organic farming 
 
1. Methodologies for individual and small group farmers will be as follows: 
a. States will identify the willing farmers/ groups and encourage them to register 
themselves for certification with concerned Regional Council/ accredited 
certification body under NPOP and obtain scope certificate. Alternatively 
farmers/ groups can approach the state authorities for enrolment or can enrol 
directly with intimation to state. 
b. Enrolled farmers/groups will have to register themselves on the Jaivik Kheti 
portal, once they are ready with scope certificate having IC-1 status.  
c. States can access the details of such farmers/ groups from Jaivik Kheti portal 
from time to time and send verified list to the PKVY national Project Monitoring 
Unit. Funds will be reimbursed directly to the Regional Councils and 
Certification Bodies on receipt of verified list from the state. Regional Councils 
and certification bodies can also assist the states for getting their farmers/ 
groups verified by the state. 
d. States will ensure adequate publicity and awareness to attract more and more 
farmers and small groups.  
e. Based upon state-wise registration and verification, funds will be provided as 
reimbursement directly to the RCs or certification bodies within the limit 
prescribed under component 14 B (3&4). 
f. In case if a farmer is having land less than 1.00 ha then his cost will be 
calculated on prorate basis. 
 
2. Certification of traditional/ default organic areas  
a. Declaration of the defined area as chemical input usage and GMO free (at 
least no such input use history in last 5 years) by state Government and/or 
730066/2022/INM
46

32 | P a g e  
 
local administration. Ban on use of all agro-chemicals within the identified 
geographical territory 
b. Adoption of organic farming policy and practices by all the farmers in the 
region and its corroboration by village councils or Gram Panchayats 
c. One-time documentation of all cultivated land and farmers and making of 
village wise clusters/ groups. Registration of village as one unit with total area 
and number of farmers 
d. State may constitute an experts committee comprising of members from MoA 
& FW, APEDA, NCOF and states to evaluate the organic status of the area 
and recommend for declaration of the defined area as organic. The committee 
will also give recommendations on the need for reduction or elimination of 
conversion period 
e. Subsequent annual inspection will be taken up by the RCs as per PGS-India 
peer appraisal. There will be single Peer appraisal of the village and uploading 
of village data on PGS-India website.  
f. Once the entire area villages are certified the entire area can be declared as 
organic 
g. For ensuring marketing there will be need for capturing of estimated yield, 
commodity-wise, village-wise and farmer-wiseon PGS portal.  
h. Financial assistance will be provided to the Gram Panchayats or States (for 
hiring the resource agencies/ persons) for capacity building and certification 
facilitation @ Rs. 900/- per ha/ year for three years, as per the provisions at 
component 14 B (3&4). 
 
********** 
 
 
 
730066/2022/INM
47