2 
 
Table of Contents 
1.0 Background 
4 
2.0 One District One Product 
5 
3.0 Programme Contents 
6 
 
4.0 Individual Category 
7 
5.0 Group Category 
8 
6.0 Support for common infrastructure 
10 
7.0 Branding and Marketing Support 
11 
8.0 Capacity Building & Research 
13 
9.0 Institutional Architecture 
16 
10.0 Studies & Reports 
26 
11.0 Project Implementation Plan (PIP) 
26 
12.0 Disbursement of Funds 
27 
13.0 Procedure with Banks for Grant 
29 
14.0 MIS 
30 
15.0 Empanelment of Expert Institutions 
31 
16.0 Convergence Framework 
31 

3 
 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
 
DPR 
Detailed Project Report 
DLC 
District Level Committee 
FPI 
Food Processing Industry 
FPO 
Farmer Producer Organisation 
FUP 
Firm level Upgradation Plan 
GOI 
Government of India 
FME 
Formalization of Micro Enterprises 
IA 
Implementing Agency 
IMEC 
Inter Ministerial Empowered Committee 
IIFPT 
Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology 
MIS 
Management Information System 
MOFPI 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
MoU 
Memorandum of Understanding 
MSDE 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
MSME 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise 
NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
NCDC 
National Co-operative Development Corporation 
NIFTEM 
National Institute for Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management 
NGO 
Non-governmental Organizations 
NRLM 
National Rural Livelihood Mission 
ODOP 
One District One Product 
PEC 
Project Executive Committee 
PIP 
Project Implementation Plan 
PMU 
Project Management Unit 
PMKSY 
Pradhan Mantri Kishan Sampada Yojana 
PMU 
Project Management Unit 
R&D 
Research and Development 
RP 
Resource Person 
SC 
Schedule Caste 
ST 
Schedule Tribe 
SHG 
Self Help Group 
SIDBI 
Small Industries Development Bank of India 
SLAC 
State Level Approval Committee 
SNA 
State Nodal Agency 
SRLM 
State Rural Livelihood Mission 
TOR 
Terms of Reference 
UT 
Union Territory 

4 
 
1.0 
Background 
1.1 
Overview 
1.1.1 The unorganized food processing sector in the country comprises nearly 25 lakh 
food processing enterprises which are unregistered and informal. With only 7% of 
investment in plant & machinery and 3% of outstanding credit, the unorganized 
enterprises contribute to 74% of employment (a third of which are women), 12% of 
output and 27% of the value addition in the food processing sector. Nearly 66% of 
these units are located in rural areas and about 80% of them are family-based 
enterprises1. Most of these units falls under category of micro manufacturing units 
in terms of their investment in plant & machinery and turnover. 
1.1.2 The unorganized food processing industry in India faces challenges that limit its 
development and weakens performance. These challenges include: (a) lack of 
productivity and innovation due to limited skills and access to modern technology 
and machinery for production and packaging; (b) deficient quality and food safety 
control systems, including lack of basic awareness on good hygienic and 
manufacturing practices;(c) lack of branding & marketing skills and inability to 
integrate with the supply chains, etc.;(d) capital deficiency and low bank credit. 
1.1.3 Unorganized micro food processing units, need intensive hand holding support for 
skill training, entrepreneurship, technology, credit and marketing, across the value 
chain, necessitating active participation of the state government for better 
outreach. In the last decade, Central and State Governments have made intensive 
efforts to organize farmers in Food Processing Organisations (FPOs) and women’s 
Self Help Groups (SHGs). SHGs have achieved considerable progress in thrift and 
their repayment record with 97% NPA level is among the best. Governments have 
made efforts to enable SHGs to undertake various manufacturing and service 
sector activities including food processing. However, there are few Government 
schemes to support FPOs and SHGs to make investment and upscale their 
operations. 
1.1.4 This scheme is a centrally sponsored scheme that is designed to address the 
challenges faced by the micro enterprises and to tap the potential of groups and 
cooperatives in supporting the upgradation and formalization of these enterprises. 
1.2 Aims 
1.2.1 The scheme aims to: 
i) 
Enhance the competitiveness of existing individual micro-enterprises in the 
unorganized segment of the food processing industry and promote 
formalization of the sector; and 
 
 
 
1NSSO, 2015 

5 
 
ii) Support Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), Self Help Groups (SHGs) and 
Producers Cooperatives along their entire value chain. 
1.3 
Objectives 
1.3.1 The objectives of scheme are to build capability of microenterprises to enable: 
i) 
Increased access to credit by existing micro food processing entrepreneurs, 
FPOs, Self Help Groups and Co-operatives; 
ii) Integration with organized supply chain by strengthening branding & 
marketing; 
iii) Support for transition of existing 2,00,000 enterprises into formal framework; 
iv) Increased access to common services like common processing facility, 
laboratories, storage, packaging, marketing and incubation services; 
v) Strengthening of institutions, research and training in the food processing 
sector; and 
vi) Increased access for the enterprises, to professional and technical support. 
1.4 
Outlay 
1.4.1 The scheme envisages an outlay of Rs. 10,000 crore over a period of five years 
from 2020-21 to 2024-25. The expenditure under the scheme would to be shared 
in 60:40 ratio between Central and State Governments, in 90:10 ratio with North 
Eastern and Himalayan States, 60:40 ratio with UTs with legislature and 100% by 
the Center for other UTs. 
1.5 
Coverage 
1.5.1 Under the scheme, 2,00,000 micro food processing units will be directly assisted 
with credit linked subsidy. Adequate supportive common infrastructure and 
institutional architecture will be supported to accelerate growth of the sector. 
 
2.0 
One District One Product 
2.1 The Scheme adopts One District One Product (ODOP) approach to reap the benefit 
of scale in terms of procurement of inputs, availing common services and 
marketing of products. ODOP for the scheme will provide the framework for value 
chain development and alignment of support infrastructure. There may be more 
than one cluster of ODOP product in one district. There may be cluster of ODOP 
product consisting of more than one adjacent district in a State. 
 
2.2 The States would identify the food product for a district, keeping in perspective the 
focus of the scheme on perishables. A baseline study would be carried out by the 
State Government. The ODOP product could be a perishable agri produce, cereal 
based product or a food product widely produced in a district and their allied sectors. 
Illustrative list of such products includes mango, potato, litchi, 

6 
 
tomato, tapioca, kinnu, bhujia, petha, papad, pickle, millet based products, 
fisheries, poultry, meat as well as animal feed among others. In addition, certain 
other traditional and innovative products including waste to wealth products could 
be supported under the Scheme. For example, honey, minor forest products in 
tribal areas, traditional Indian herbal edible items like turmeric, amla, haldi, etc. 
Support for agricultural produce would be for their processing along with efforts to 
reduce wastage, proper assaying and storage and marketing.  
2.3 With respect to support to existing individual micro units for capital investment, 
preference would be given to those producing ODOP products. However, existing 
units producing other products would also be supported. In case of capital 
investment by groups, predominately those involved in ODOP products would be 
supported. 
2.4 Support to groups processing other products in such districts would only be for 
those already processing those products and with adequate technical, financial 
and entrepreneurial strength. 
2.5 New units, whether for individuals or groups would only be supported for ODOP 
products. 
2.6 Support for common infrastructure and marketing & branding would only be for 
ODOP products. In case of support for marketing & branding at State or regional 
level, same products of districts not having that product as ODOP could also be 
included. 
2.7 Department of Commerce is focusing on agriculture crops on a cluster approach 
for support for exports under the Agriculture Export Policy and Ministry of 
Agriculture is also focusing on cluster approach for development of specific agri- 
produce in districts having comparative advantage. A number of states have 
adopted similar cluster based development. The ODOP approach of the Scheme 
would lead to ease in providing common facilities and other support services. 
 
3.0 Programme Components 
 
3.1 The programme has four broad components addressing the needs of the sector: 
 
i) 
Support to individual and groups of micro enterprises; 
ii) 
Branding and Marketing support; 
iii) 
Support for strengthening of institutions; 
iv) 
Setting up robust project management framework. 
3.2 Details of each of these components are described below. 

7 
 
4.0 
Support to Individual Micro Enterprises 
 
4.1 
Individual micro food processing units would be provided credit-linked capital 
subsidy @35% of the eligible project cost with a maximum ceiling of Rs.10.0 lakh 
per unit. Beneficiary contribution should be minimum of 10% of the project cost 
with balance being loan from Bank. 
 
4.2 
Eligibility criteria for individual micro enterprises under the scheme: 
i) Existing micro food processing units in operations; 
ii) Existing units should be those identified in the SLUP for ODOP 
products or by the Resource Person on physical verification. In case 
of units using electrical power, electricity bill would support it being in 
operations. For others units, existing operations, inventory, machines 
and sales would form the basis; 
iii) The enterprise should be unincorporated and should employ less 
than 10 workers; 
iv) The enterprise should preferably be involved in the product identified 
in the ODOP of the district. Other micro enterprises could also be 
considered; 
v) The applicant should have ownership right of the enterprise; 
vi) Ownership status of enterprise could be proprietary / partnership firm; 
vii) The applicant should be above 18 years of age and should possess 
at least VIII standard pass educational qualification; 
viii) Only one person from one family would be eligible for obtaining    
financial assistance. The “family” for this purpose would include self, 
spouse and children; 
ix) Willingness to formalize and contribute10% of project cost and obtain 
Bank loan; 
x) Cost of the land should not be included in the Project cost. Cost of 
the ready built as well as long lease or rental workshed could be 
included in the project cost. Lease rental of workshed to be included 
in the project cost should be for a maximum period of 3 years only. 
4.3 
Selection Process for Individual Micro Units 
4.3.1 Identification of existing Units to be supported would be by a two-pronged process. 
Based on One District One Product approach, support would preferably be 
provided to the Units engaged in that product in the district. Other units, who have 
potential, would also be supported. 

8 
 
4.3.2 Applications would be invited at the district level on an ongoing basis for Units, 
from those interested in availing the benefits under the Scheme. Resource Persons 
(RPs) would undertake survey of various clusters and identify units that show 
potential for availing benefits under the Scheme. For applications received directly, 
RPs would undertake field verification and due diligence to assess their potential. 
4.3.3 All the potential cases based on identification of Units directly by RPs and 
application received would be submitted before the District Level Committee. 
District Level Committee should study the report submitted by RP for each Unit 
and interview the interested persons. 
4.3.4 Due diligence to be carried out by the RP for each Unit should have the following 
details: 
i) Annual Turnover of the enterprise; 
ii) Track Record of payments by the enterprise; 
iii) Existing infrastructure; 
iv) Backward and Forward Linkages; 
v) Proximity to clusters; 
vi) Marketing linkages of the enterprise. 
4.3.5 For the cases recommended by the District Level Committee/SNA, RPs should 
help them in preparation of DPR for availing bank loan for upgradation of the Unit. 
The DPR along with necessary documents should be submitted to the Banks for 
sanction of loan. 
4.4 
The procedure delineated above would apply for selection of new units also, 
provided the ODOP baseline study throws up a need / potential for such new 
investments. 
4.5 
State Governments should decide at what level they would want to finalize 
individual micro units list to be supported, by DLC or at SNA level. Similarly, for 
applications for capital investment by groups, common infrastructure & marketing 
& branding, the states should decide the role of DLC/SNA in routing of applications. 
 
5.0 
Group Category 
 
5.1 
The Scheme would support clusters and groups such as FPOs/SHGs/ producer 
cooperatives along their entire value chain for sorting, grading, assaying, storage, 
common processing, packaging, marketing, processing of agri-produce, and 
testing laboratories. 
 
5.2 
Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs)/Producer Cooperatives 
5.2.1 FPOs and Producer Cooperatives would be provided the following support: 

9 
 
i) Grant @35% with credit linkage; 
ii) Training support; 
iii) Maximum limit of grant in such cases would be as prescribed. 
5.2.2 Eligibility Criteria for Co-operatives/FPOs: 
i) It should preferably be engaged in processing of ODOP produce; 
ii) It should have minimum turnover of Rs.1 crore; 
iii) The cost of the project proposed should not be larger than the present turnover; 
iv) The members should have sufficient knowledge and experience in dealing with 
the product for a minimum period of 3 years. 
v) The cooperative/FPO should have sufficient internal resources or sanction from 
the State Government to meet 10% of the project cost and margin money for 
working capital; 
5.3 
Self Help Groups (SHGs) 
5.3.1 A number of SHGs are undertaking food processing activities. The Scheme 
proposes to provide following support to SHGs:- 
5.3.2 Seed capital: 
i) Seed capital @ Rs40,000/- per member of SHG for working capital and purchase 
of small tools would be provided under the scheme; 
ii) Priority would be given for SHGs involved in ODOP produce in giving seed 
capital; 
iii) All the members of an SHG may not be involved in the food processing. 
Therefore, seed capital would be provided at the federation level of SHGs; 
iv) This would be given as grant to the SHG federation by SNA/ SRLM. SHG 
federation would provide this amount as a loan to the members of SHGs to be 
repaid to the SHG. 
5.3.3 Support to individual SHG member as a single unit of food processing industry 
with credit linked grant @35% with maximum amount being Rs 10 lakh. 
5.3.4 Support for capital investment at federation of SHG level, with credit linked grant 
@35%. Maximum limit of grant in such cases would be as prescribed. 
5.3.5 Training & Handholding Support to SHGs: For support to SHGs, a large number 
of trained resource persons are available with State Rural Livelihood Missions 
(SRLMs). These local resource persons of SRLM having expertise in agro-produce 
would be utilized for training, upgradation of units, DPR preparation, handholding 
support, etc. 
5.3.6 Eligibility Criteria for Seed Capital for SHGs: 

10 
 
i) 
Only SHG members that are presently engaged in food processing would be 
eligible; 
ii) The SHG member has to commit to utilize this amount for working capital and 
purchase of small tools and give a commitment in this regard to the SHG and 
SHG federation; 
iii) Before providing the seed capital, SHG Federation should collect the following 
basic details for each of the members: 
a) Details of the product being processed; 
b) Other activities undertaken; 
c) Annual turnover; 
d) Source of raw materials and marketing of produce. 
5.3.7 Eligibility Criteria for Credit Linked Grant for Capital Investment for SHGs: 
i) 
The SHGs should have sufficient own funds for meeting 10% of the project 
cost and 20% margin money for working capital or sanction of the same as 
grant from the State Government; 
ii) 
The SHG members should have for a minimum period of 3 years’ experience 
in processing of the ODOP product. 
 
6.0 
Support for Common Infrastructure 
 
6.1 
Support for common infrastructure would be provided to FPOs, SHGs, 
cooperatives, any Government agency or private enterprises. Common 
infrastructure created under the scheme should also be available for other units 
and public to utilize on hiring basis for substantial part of the capacity. Eligibility of 
a project under this category would be decided based on benefit to farmers and 
industry at large, viability gap, absence of private investment, criticality to value 
chain, etc. Credit linked grant would be available @ 35%. Maximum limit of grant 
in such cases would be as prescribed. 
 
6.2 
Types of Common infrastructure to be funded under the scheme: The 
following common infrastructure would be funded under the Scheme: 
i) Premises for assaying of agriculture produce, sorting, grading, warehouse and 
cold storage at the farm-gate; 
ii) Common processing facility for processing of ODOP produce; 
iii) Incubation Centre should involve one or more product lines, which could be 
utilized by smaller units on a hire basis for processing of their produce. The 
Incubation Centre may partly be used for training purpose. It should be run on 
commercial basis. 

11 
 
6.3 
Procedure for groups to send proposals for Common Infrastructure and 
capital investment by FPOs/SHGs/Cooperatives: 
6.3.1 The following procedure should be followed for seeking funding for common 
infrastructure and capital investment by FPOs/SHGs/Cooperatives under the 
Scheme: 
i) 
A DPR for seeking assistance under the Scheme for capital investment and 
common infrastructure should be prepared, based on the format as prescribed; 
ii) 
The DPR should have necessary details of the proposal, detailed project cost, 
proposed manpower, turnover, marketing channel, sources of raw material, 
estimated profit & loss account, cash flow statement, etc.; 
iii) 
The DPR should be sent to State Nodal Agency (SNA). After approval of the 
proposal by SLAC, SNA should recommend the proposal to MoFPI. Any 
proposal for assistance to a group for grant above Rs.10 lakh should be sent 
to MOFPI for approval. 
iv) 
After approval of the proposal by MoFPI, the proposal should be forwarded to 
the financial institution for sanction of loan; 
v) 
The DPR may also contain proposal for training support to the group members 
based on the training hours & modules, as prescribed and the cost norms of 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. Component of training 
and capacity building would be fully funded under the Scheme; 
vi) 
Assistance of Rs. 50,000/- per case would be provided to FPOs/SHGs/ 
Cooperatives for preparation of DPR; 
vii) 
Disbursement of grant should take place to the bank account of the applicant 
organization after sanction of loan by the bank. 
 
7.0 
Branding and Marketing Support 
 
7.1 
Marketing and branding support would be provided to groups of FPOs/SHGs/ 
Cooperatives or an SPV of micro food processing enterprises under the Scheme. 
Following the ODOP approach, marketing & branding support would only be 
provided for such product at the State or regional level. 
 
7.2 
Eligible items for support 
i) 
Training relating to marketing to be fully funded under the scheme; 
ii) 
Developing 
a 
common 
brand 
and 
packaging 
including 
standardization to participate in common packaging; 
iii) 
Marketing tie up with national and regional retail chains and state 
level institutions; 

12 
 
iv) 
Quality control to ensure product quality meets required standards. 
7.3 
Support for marketing and branding requires developing a common brand, 
common packaging and product standardization. The appropriate level for 
common branding and packaging would differ from place to place, case to case 
and product to product. Whether it should be district, regional or state level would 
be decided by the concerned SNA in each case. Therefore, the proposal for 
support to marketing and branding should be prepared by the SNA. Support for 
branding and marketing would be limited to 50% of the total expenditure. Maximum 
limit of grant in such cases would be as prescribed. No support would be provided 
for opening retail outlets under the scheme. 
7.4 
Vertical products at the national level could also be provided support for branding 
& marketing on the same lines as described above for ODOP focus. Such support 
for common branding/packaging and marketing would be provided at the national 
level. Proposal for that support should be sent to MoFPI by the states or national 
level institutions or organizations or partner institutions. 
7.5 
Eligibility criteria: 
7.5.1 The proposals should fulfill the following conditions:- 
i) 
The proposal should relate to ODOP; 
ii) 
Minimum turnover of product to be eligible for assistance should be Rs 5 
crore; 
iii) 
The final product should be the one to be sold to the consumer in retail pack; 
iv) 
Applicant should be an FPO/SHG/cooperative/ regional - State levels SPV to 
bring large number of producers together; 
v) 
Product and producers should be scalable to larger levels; 
vi) 
Management and entrepreneurship capability of promoting entity should be 
established in the proposal. 
7.6 
Procedure for applying for assistance under Branding & Marketing 
7.6.1 Detailed Project Report preparation: 
i) A DPR should be prepared for the proposal, comprising essential details of the 
project, product, strategy, quality control, aggregation of produce, common 
packaging and branding, pricing strategy, promotional details, warehousing 
and storage, marketing channel, plans for increase in sales etc.; 
ii) Support up to Rs.5 lakh would be available from SNA for preparing DPR for 
proposals for marketing & branding; 
iii) The proposal should also contain flow chart of activities from the procurement 
of raw material to marketing, critical control points, ensuring quality control, 

13 
 
plans for five years in terms of promotional activities, increasing the number of 
participating producers and turnover; 
7.6.2 There should be an agreement with a business plan, executed between the 
cooperatives/SHG/FPO/SPV, the lead buyer(s), if any, and the SNA, which would 
describe the capital and services needs of the producers and proposed 
improvements that would allow them to upgrade their production capacities and 
skills to strengthen their linkage with the market, i.e. the lead buyer(s). 
 
8.0 
Capacity Building & Research 
 
8.1 
Support to National Institutions: 
 
8.1.1 Capacity building and training is a critical component in technical upgradation and 
formalization of micro food processing enterprises. At the National level, National 
Institute for Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) and 
Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology (IIFPT) would play pivotal role in 
capacity building & research. They would be eligible for financial assistance 
towards research and capacity building. NIFTEM and IIFPT in partnership with 
State Level Technical Institutions would provide training and research support to 
the selected enterprises/groups/clusters. National level product specific institutions 
under ICAR, CSIR or premier institutes like DFRL and CFTRI will be partner 
institutions for providing support at the vertical level across the country for training 
and research. 
8.1.2 NIFTEM and IIFPT would carry out the following activities: 
i) 
Capacity building and training for MoFPI, State and District officials; 
ii) Developing curricula and training modules and partner with State Level 
Technical Institutes for further trainings to micro enterprises and groups; 
iii) Training of trainers; 
iv) Development of online modules for training; 
v) Preparation of standard Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for typical products 
for micro units; 
vi) Development of shelf of technology/ machines for up-gradation of typical 
micro units; 
vii) Partnership with other research and training institutions for the above 
activities; 
viii) Strengthening State Level Technical Institutions for delivery of the Scheme 
requirements. 
8.1.3 NIFTEM and IIFPT would establish a PMU in their organization for the Scheme 
with composition as prescribed. For these PMUs, they would engage personnel on 

14 
 
contract basis. Grant under the Scheme would be provided to NIFTEM and IIFPT 
to meet full cost of these PMUs. 
8.1.4 NIFTEM and IIFPT should prepare Project Implementation Plan (PIP)for the 
activities they propose to undertake along budget and submit to MoFPI. Committee 
for Capacity Building & Research at MoFPI would examine the PIPs and seek 
approval of IMEC for them. MoFPI would provide funding support under the 
Scheme to NIFTEM and IIFPT for the activities approved in the PIPs. 
8.2 
Support to State Level technical Institutions 
8.2.1 State Government should nominate a State Level Technical Institution for the 
Scheme. Their activities would include: 
i) 
Prepare PIP for the State Level Technical Institution; 
ii) Providing inputs to PIP being prepared by the SNA relating to capacity 
building and research; 
iii) Conducting capacity building and training for State and District officials; 
iv) Conducting training for District Resource Persons; 
v) Provide inputs for Branding and Marketing plans being prepared by SNAs; 
vi) Provide mentoring support to District Resource Persons for handholding 
micro enterprises, preparations of DPRs, etc. 
8.2.2 The nominated State Level Technical Institution should prepare PIP including 
annual training calendar for the proposed activities and send that to MoFPI after 
approval from the State Level Approval Committee in consultation with the 
NIFTEM and IIFPT. 
8.2.3 Criteria for selection of State Level Technical Institution: The State Level 
Technical Institution should be an existing institution involved in food processing 
technology. This Institute could be: 
i) 
A college/institute under State Agriculture University or any other University; 
ii) 
A State-owned food processing technology research Institute; 
iii) 
An institute under CSIR or any Government of India institute focusing on food 
processing; 
iv) 
If it is a college, it should have undergraduate/post graduate courses in food 
processing technology and necessary faculty; 
v) 
The Institute should have a full-fledged laboratory with necessary testing and 
processing equipment; 
vi) 
The Institute should have faculty undertaking research work and product 
development and machinery for food processing, especially for MSMEs; 

15 
 
vii) 
The proposal should be recommended by the State Government; 
viii) The Institute should be willing to appoint a Nodal Officer and a dedicated 
team consisting of at least two faculty members focusing exclusively on the 
Scheme; 
ix) 
The Institute should have sufficient built-up space to undertake training for 
beneficiaries under the Scheme; 
x) 
The institute preferably should have pilot plants for processing few products 
under ODOP for the State. 
8.3 
Training support to individuals/groups 
8.3.1 Training support would be provided to individual units and groups that are being 
provided support for capital investment. In addition, training support would also be 
provided to other existing units and groups in the districts that are processing 
ODOP products. Groups that are being provided support for marketing & branding 
under the Scheme would also be provided training support. 
8.3.2 Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship (MSDE)have fixed per hour rate 
to be spent on trainings. The same benchmark rate would be utilized for the 
Scheme. Type of training and number of hours of training should follow the 
prescribed norms. 
8.3.3 The following are the focus areas for capacity building under the Scheme: 
i) Entrepreneurship development, essential functions of enterprise operations, 
marketing, book keeping, registration, FSSAI standards, Udyog Aadhar, GST 
Registration, general hygiene, etc.; 
ii) Specific training designed for ODOP product or the product produced by the unit 
including operations of necessary machines, hygiene issues, packaging, 
storage, procurement, new products development etc.; 
8.3.4 Mode of Training 
i) 
Online modules would be used for the general training applicable to all Units; 
ii) 
Product specific training would be provided for the districts for ODOP using 
RSETI physical infrastructure to the extent possible; 
iii) 
Training should be organized in short modules on a weekly basis using audio- 
visual support within the district so that the disturbance to the existing 
business operations is least; 
iv) 
An important component of the training would be work on the machines that 
Units are going to purchase and training on hygiene and packaging. 
Therefore, a specific component for training is being introduced for such 
beneficiaries in the existing units using those machines within the district or 
outside for a short duration. 

16 
 
8.3.5 Handholding Support: The Scheme envisages engaging Resources Persons 
(RPs) at the district/ regional level for providing hand-holding support to the micro 
food processing enterprises. These RPs would carry out the following functions: 
i) 
Handholding micro enterprises in preparation of DPRs, getting bank loan, 
training, upgradation of the unit, getting necessary regulatory approvals, 
hygiene, etc.; 
ii) Provide inputs for PIPs and ODOP and Cluster studies and study of groups; 
iii) Identification and facilitation of applications for subsidies and seed capital to 
individual micro enterprises and groups and common facilities; 
 
9.0 
Institutional Architecture 
 
9.1 
Robust institutional architecture at all administrative levels would be set up for the 
scheme. There would be committees at the National, State and District levels (for 
policy guidance) for implementation and to monitor the progress of the Scheme. 
These committees would oversee the performance of the National Programme 
Division at MoFPI and the State Nodal Agencies. In addition to these, there would 
be PMUs set up comprising consultants and experts engaged on full time basis to 
support the National Programme Division at MoFPI and the State Nodal Agencies. 
Institutional structure is illustrated in the chart below and described in the section 
below: 
 
 
Figure 1: Institutional Architecture 
 
 

17 
 
9.2 
National Level Structures 
9.2.1 Inter-Ministerial Empowered Committee: 
9.2.1.1 At the national level, there would an Inter-Ministerial Empowered Committee 
(IMEC) chaired by Minister for Food Processing Industries with the following 
composition. 
Table 1: Composition of IMEC 
 
 
Composition 
Designation 
1. 
Hon’ble Minister of Food Processing Industries 
Chairman 
2. 
Hon’ble Minister of State of Food Processing Industries 
Vice Chairman 
3. 
Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing Industries, 
Government of India (GoI) 
Member 
4. 
Secretary, Department of Agriculture, Co-operation, & 
Farmers’ Welfare, GoI 
Member 
5. 
Secretary, Department 
Dairying, GoI 
of 
Animal Husbandry and Member 
6. 
Secretary, Department 
Education, GoI 
of Agriculture Research and Member 
7. 
Secretary, Department of Fisheries, GoI 
Member 
8. 
Secretary, Department of Urban Development & Housing, 
GOI 
Member 
9. 
Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development, GoI 
Member 
10. Secretary, 
Ministry 
Entrepreneurship 
of 
Skill 
Development 
& Member 
11. Secretary, Ministry of MSME, GoI 
Member 
12. Chairman, FSSAI 
Member 
13. Chairman, NSDC 
Member 
14. Representative of NABARD 
Member 
15. AS&FA, Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
Member 
16. Representative of NITI Aayog 
Member 
17. Mission 
Director, 
(Officer 
of 
the rank of
Additional/ Joint Secretary and above), Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries. 
Member Secretary 
 
9.2.1.2 MoFPI may nominate any other member to IMEC, PEC and Committee on 
Capacity Building & Research. The IMEC would meet at least once in a quarter 
and would be the policy making body giving overall direction and guidance for 
implementation of the scheme and would monitor and review its progress and 
performance. 

18 
 
9.2.1.3 Functions of IMEC would be: 
i) Approval of the following: 
a) Scheme Guidelines; 
b) PIPs being submitted by States after due approvals from SLAC; 
c) Empanelment of Expert Institutions; 
d) Approval of all proposals with project size above Rs.10 lakh; 
e) PIP for capacity building and research; 
ii) Review of the following: 
a) PIP implementation; 
b) Various studies; 
c) Capacity Building activities of MoFPI and State agencies; 
d) Trainings on skills and EDP imparted to enterprises and groups- broad 
review of timely trainings as per Training committee feedback; 
e) Activities being undertaken for strengthening of State institutions; 
f) Timely subsidy disbursal for micro enterprises and groups with Nodal 
Banks. 
iii) Apart from the above approval and review activities, the IMEC would also 
undertake the following activities 
a) Review and set quarterly targets; 
b) Monitor inter-ministerial co-operation and convergence; 
c) Oversee the overall scheme progress; 
d) Oversee performance of States; 
e) Any other matter relating to implementation of the Scheme. 
9.2.2 Project Executive Committee: 
9.2.2.1 A Project Executive Committee would be constituted at the operational level in the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries for regular monitoring and implementation 
of the scheme with the following composition: 
Table 2: Composition of PEC 
 
(i) 
Additional Secretary, MOFPI 
Chairperson 
(ii) 
Additional/Joint Secretaries - Ministry/Department of Commerce, 
Agriculture, Rural Development, Animal Husbandry & Dairying, 
Fisheries, MSME, MSDE, Urban Development & Housing and NITI 
Aayog 
Members 

19 
 
(iii) AS&FA, Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
Member 
(iv) Representatives of APEDA, MPEDA, NIFTEM, IIFPT, CFTRI, National 
Horticulture Board (NHB), FSSAI, NABARD 
Members 
(v) 
Experts in Food Processing, Banking/Finance and Marketing 
Members 
(vi) Nominees of the Partner Institutions TRIFED, NCDC, NSCFDC and 
SFAC 
Members 
 
9.2.2.2 The Executive Committee would meet once every month and will have the 
following functions: 
i) Approval of the following: 
a) Examination of all the proposals submitted to IMEC for approval including 
PIPs of States, National institutions, State Level Technical Institutions and 
projects for approval above Rs 10 lakh proposed by the States; 
b) Setting up of NPMU. 
c) Approve projects under the scheme for items to be spent by Government of 
India and those with 100% central share up to a limit of Rs 10 lakh; 
d) Release of 60% of the matching grant as GOI share to the individual 
beneficiaries; 
e) IEC proposals 
f) 
MIS related decisions; 
ii) Review of the following: 
a) Timely subsidy disbursal for micro enterprises and groups with Nodal Banks 
and escalation to IMEC in case of need; 
iii) Apart from the above approval and review activities, the PEC would also 
undertake the following activities: 
a) Set monthly targets for the scheme in line with the annual targets being set 
by the IMEC; 
b) Monitor the progress of the scheme through the portal and through effective 
dashboard monitoring; 
c) Inter Ministries cooperation. 
9.2.3 Committee on Capacity Building & Research: 
9.2.3.1 There would be a Committee for Capacity Building and Research at the national 
level to oversee the training and research aspects. This Committee would be 
chaired by a prominent industry expert. The Committee would have following the 
members:- 

20 
 
Table 3-Composition of Training Committee at MoFPI 
 
(i) 
Industry Expert 
Chairperson 
(ii) 
Vice Chancellor, NIFTEM / Director, IIFPT 
Member 
(iii) 
JS, MOFPI dealing with skill training 
Member 
(iv) 
JS, MSDE 
Member 
(v) 
Representative of Food Sector Skill Council 
Member 
(vi) 
Representatives 
of 
CFTRI/DFRL/relevant 
ICAR institutes. 
Member 
(vii) 
Representative of M/o Rural Development 
Member 
(viii) 
Experts 
in 
Banking/Finance 
and 
Marketing/Branding 
as 
nominated  by 
Programme Director, MoFPI. 
Members 
 
9.2.3.2 The Committee on Capacity Building & Research would have the following 
functions: 
1. Approval of the following: 
i) 
Guidance for the carrying out capacity building & research activities under 
the Scheme. 
ii) Proposals of Capacity Building activities of MoFPI, State and District 
agencies for further financial approvals from PEC/IMEC 
iii) Calendars and syllabus for training being given by National and State 
Agencies for enterprises and groups 
iv) Curriculum for handholding support modules for FUPs and DPRs for the 
enterprises. 
2. Review of the following: 
i) Trainings being provided as per approved training calendars by National, 
State agencies and District Resource persons. 
9.2.4 National Programme Management Unit (NPMU): There would be a PMU housed 
at the National level comprising professionals engaged on contract basis. The 
PMU would provide all support to the Programme Division of MoFPI for carrying all 
the functions listed above. The specific functions of the NPMU will include the 
following: 
i) 
Prepare necessary templates, closely coordinate with, mentor and monitor 
State PMUs and SNAs, for timely completion of studies and PIPs; 
ii) Capacity building activities of MoFPI, State and District Agencies and placing 
the proposals for due approvals of the training committee and PEC; 

21 
 
iii) Development of the National Portal and MIS and ensuring timely flow of 
information in the Portal; 
iv) Trainings being provided as per approved training calendars by National, State 
agencies and District Resource persons for further review by Training 
Committee; 
v) Strengthening of National and State Level Technical Institutions; 
vi) Timely disbursal of subsidies to enterprises through the National Portal; 
vii) Appraisal of DPRs submitted by the States and other agencies to MOFPI for 
approval; 
viii) Timely provision of seed capital support to groups; 
ix) Timely submissions of Branding and Marketing plans from SNA; 
x) Timely setting up of the SPMUs and District Resource Persons. 
9.2.5 Nodal Bank: MoFPI would select a Nodal Bank for facilitation and ensuring 
smooth flow of subsidies from the Banks to the micro enterprises. The functions of 
the Nodal bank would include the following: 
i) 
Monitoring and Liaising with Banks for target driven approvals of applications 
and timely disbursal of subsidies to individual micro enterprises and groups; 
ii) Transfer of subsidy from the central and state governments to the bank 
accounts of beneficiary in the lending bank branch. 
9.3 
State Level Structures 
9.3.1 At the State level, a State Level Approval Committee would oversee the 
implementation of the scheme and the scheme would be operated by a nominated 
State Nodal Agency, supported by a State PMU. The details are given below. 
9.3.2 State level Approval Committee: 
9.3.2.1 The State Level Approval Committee would be chaired by the Chief Secretary or 
his nominee and would have the following composition: 
Table 4: SLAC Composition 
 
 
(i) 
Chief Secretary 
Chairperson 
(ii) 
Finance Secretary 
Member 
(iii) 
ACS/Pr Secretary/Secretaries of Food 
Processing, 
Agriculture, 
Industries, 
MSME, 
Fisheries, 
Animal 
Husbandry, Skill Development 
Members 
(iv) 
Mission Director, SRLM 
Member 
(v) 
Representative of State Level Technical Institution 
Member 

22 
 
(vi) 
Institutions – Representatives from key State Technical 
Institutions. 
Members 
(vii) 
Representatives of NABARD, NSDC, SLBC, NCDC 
Member 
(viii) 
Experts in Banking/Finance and Marketing/Branding as 
nominated by the State Government 
Member 
(ix) 
State Nodal Officer 
Member 
Secretary 
 
9.3.2.2 The State Government may nominate any other member to SLAC or DLC. 
9.3.2.3 The State Level Approval Committee would be responsible for approval of the 
following: 
i) 
Surveys/Studies; 
ii) PIP submitted by SNA; 
iii) Capacity building activities of State and District officials; 
iv) Training and skill development calendars for State level agencies, 
enterprises; 
v) Strengthening of State institutions; 
vi) Subsidy proposals for groups for recommending to MOFPI; 
vii) Proposals for provision of Common Facilities, groups and marketing & 
branding; 
viii) Seed Capital to groups; 
ix) The SLAC will have power to sanction project expenditure up to Rs. 10 lakh 
on various activities included in the PIP; 
9.3.2.4 Apart from the above approvals, the SLAC would also undertake the following 
activities 
i) Set monthly targets for the scheme in line with the overall scheme targets. 
ii) Monitor the progress of the scheme through the portal. 
iii) Ensure synergy with other relevant organizations. 
iv) Ensure inspection of Units/ CFC funded under the scheme. 
9.3.3 State Nodal Department: Each State Government should appoint a Nodal 
Department at the Governmental level and a State Nodal Officer to oversee the 
implementation of the Scheme. The selection of the Nodal Department should be 
undertaken keeping in view the relative strength and experience of various 
departments in the State involved in the food processing sector at micro & cluster 
levels. The State Nodal Officer should be of the rank Secretary or Director/HOD. 
The potential nodal departments could be Agriculture or Horticulture Department, 

23 
 
Food Processing Department, Industries Department, MSME Department or Rural 
Development Department. 
9.3.4 State Nodal Agency: Each State should appoint a State Nodal Agency. The State 
Nodal Agency (SNA) could be a Directorate or a Mission or an entity of the State 
Government. The SNA would be the operational agency at the State level for 
implementing the Scheme. Role and Responsibilities of the SNA shall include: 
i) 
Conducting various studies; 
ii) Getting PIP prepared; 
iii) Monitoring the training and capacity building activities undertaken by State 
Level Technical Institute and District Resource Persons; 
iv) Carrying out strengthening of State Level Technical Institution; 
v) Ensuring timely submission of Subsidy proposals by District Committees; 
vi) Ensuring timely submission of plans for provision of Common Facilities; 
vii) Ensuring timely submission of Seed Capital proposals of groups; 
viii) Developing Branding and Marketing proposals; 
ix) Monitoring the handholding support being given by District Resource Persons 
to enterprises for DPRs; 
x) Setting up of SPMU; 
xi) Monitoring and approvals for hiring of District Resource Persons; 
xii) Furnishing Utilization Certificates (UCs) and regular Progress Reports to 
MoFPI in the prescribed formats; 
xiii) IEC; 
xiv) Sharing of best practices. 
9.3.5 State Project Management Unit (SPMU): The State Nodal Agency (SNA) should 
appoint a State Project Management Unit (SPMU). The SPMU could be appointed 
by recruiting the staff on contract basis or on deputation or own staff of SNA. The 
SPMU staff should be engaged on full-time basis for the work of the Scheme. SNA 
may decide to appoint a private agency also as a SPMU through competitive 
bidding process. 
9.3.6 SNA would be provided 2% of the Scheme expenses as administrative expenses. 
The expenses of the SPMU would be borne by the SNA from 2% for administrative 
cost allowed under the Scheme. Details of staff of SPMU along with qualification 
would be as prescribed. 
9.3.6.1 SPMU would have the key responsibility of supporting the SNA in all the functions 
as indicated in para 9.3.4. 

24 
 
9.3.7 District Level Structures 
9.3.7.1 District Level Committee: At the district level, a District Level Committee (DLC) 
would be constituted under the Chairmanship of District Collector. The Committee 
would have representation from panchayats, banks, subject experts, academia, 
community institutions, FPOs/SHGs, etc. The District Collector may co-opt any 
other person as a member of DLC. The composition of the District Level Committee 
would be : 
Table 5: Composition of DLC 
 
(i) 
District Collector 
Chairperson 
(ii) 
GM, DIC, District Agriculture Officer, District 
Horticulture Officer 
Member 
(iii) 
Sarpanch of one GP 
Member 
(iv) 
One Block Development Officer 
Member 
(v) 
District Lead Bank Manager 
Member 
(vi) 
SHG/FPO representatives 
Members 
(vii) 
Representative of NABARD 
Member 
(viii) District representative of SRLM 
Member 
(viii) Any other persons nominated by Collector 
Member 
 
9.3.7.2 The DLC would be responsible for the following: 
i) Approvals of applications for loan and subsidy to individual micro enterprises; 
ii) Recommend applications for common infrastructures & groups to SNA; 
iii) Monitor handholding support being rendered to micro enterprises by District 
Resource Persons; 
iv) Monitor the progress of the Scheme through the portal and through effective 
dashboard monitoring; 
v) Ensure synergy with all relevant Institutions. 
9.3.8 Resources Persons 
9.3.8.1 At the district/regional level, Resources Persons should be appointed by SNA for 
providing handholding support to the beneficiaries. 
9.3.8.2 RPs should have the following qualifications: 
i) 
Diploma/degree in Food Technology/ Food Engineering from reputed 
National/ International University/Institute 
ii) 3-5 years’ experience in providing consultancy services to food processing 
industries for technology upgradation, new product development, quality 
assurance, food safety management; 

25 
 
iii) If persons qualified in food technology are not available, persons with 
experience in food processing industry, banking, DPR preparation and 
training may be engaged. 
9.3.8.3 Handholding support should be provided by the Resource Persons to individual 
units and groups for preparation of DPR, taking bank loan, support for obtaining 
necessary registration and licences including food standards of FSSAI, Udyog 
Aadhar, GST etc. 
9.3.8.4 Payment to the Resource Persons would be made on the basis of each beneficiary 
supported by them after sanction of loan to them by the bank. Payment to each 
Resources Person would be @ Rs.20,000/- per bank loan sanctioned. 50% of the 
payment would be made after sanction of bank loan and remaining 50% after the 
Units takes GST &Udyog Aadhar registration, takes standard compliance of 
FSSAI. Implement the project and is given training. 
9.3.9 State Nodal Department should decide on the flow& approval process of 
applications and support under the Scheme. They should decide the respective 
roles of DLC, SNA & State Level Technical Institutions for the following:- 
(i) Approval level for shortlisting of individual application; 
(ii) Flow of application of groups & common infrastructure within the state level; 
(iii) Training & capacity building activities and decision making between DLC, 
SNA & State Level Technical Institutions; 
(iv) This decision on the flow of applications & process for support within the state 
would apply irrespective of the roles of the agencies specified in the 
Guidelines. 
9.3.10 Partner Institutions for Convergence 
9.3.10.1 The scheme lays special focus on SC/ST, women and aspirational districts and 
FPOs, SHGs and producer cooperatives. The following organisations have been 
working in these areas: 
a) TRIFED; 
b) National SC Development Finance Corporation; 
c) National Cooperative Development Cooperation; 
d) Small Farmer Agri-Business Consortium; 
e) National Rural Livelihood Mission under M/o Rural Development. 
9.3.10.2 The above institutions may converge their activities by facilitating identification 
of units / clusters of STs, SCs, cooperatives, FPOs and SHGs respectively. They 
should support preparation of DPRs and proposals for funding and development 
of such institutions under the Scheme and feed such proposals to the State PIPs. 
They should also provide handholding support to such supported units and work 

26 
 
with the States in this endeavor. Each of the Partner Institutions would be member 
of the PEC. 
 
10.0 Studies & Reports 
 
10.1 State Level Upgradation Plan (SLUP): The SNA should conduct a State Level 
Upgradation Plan (SLUP) which will have the following two components: 
 
10.1.1 Base-Line Assessments: The baseline study should focus on identifying ODOP. 
This study should get concluded by 31 July, 2020 in each State. For this study, 
Rs.2.5 – 10.0 lakh would be provided to the States. 
10.1.2 State Level Upgradation Plan: Once decision is taken on the ODOP, detailed 
study should be carried out in the States detailing the number of units undertaking 
processing of that product in the district, farm level of operations, total volume and 
value of produce, technology, farm gate level processing, storage, warehousing, 
number of processing units, their details, etc. This study should be conducted by 
31 December, 2020. The amount provided for the above study would be Rs.10.0 
– 75.0 lakh to the States. The Terms of Reference (TOR) of the above studies 
would be as prescribed. 
10.2 Study of FPOs/Producer Cooperatives/ SHGs: In parallel to the above study, 
SNAs in coordination with NCDC, SFAC, TRIFED, NSCFDC and SRLMs should 
collect data on the level of operation of SHGs, producer cooperatives, FPOs in the 
states. 
10.3 Once the infrastructure and other facilities as envisaged in the State Level 
Upgradation Plan have been carried out, another study should be carried out for 
further course of action for ODOP in such districts. For any other studies to be 
conducted by the SNA, they should include the proposal for the study in Project 
Implementation Plan and send it for approval to MoFPI along with cost estimates. 
 
11.0 Project Implementation Plan (PIP) 
 
11.1 Each State should prepare a PIP for the year in the month of January of the 
previous year and send it to MoFPI for approval by 31st January of that year. The 
PIP should be placed before the Inter Ministerial Empowered Committee for 
approval. The State Level Approval Committee should recommend the PIP to 
MoFPI. MoFPI should approve the PIP by 31st March of the previous Financial year. 
In the year 2020-21, PIPs should be sent by the States to MoFPI for approval by 
30th September 2020. 
 
11.2 The PIP should contain the following details:- 
i) 
Implementation arrangements for programme in the State including the 
agencies assigned, institutions selected etc; 

27 
 
ii) State Nodal Agency details along with officers assigned; 
iii) Composition of SLAC/DLC; 
iv) Details and plans for setting up of SPMU and manpower; 
v) Details and plans for hiring of District Resource Persons; 
vi) Details of State Level Technical Institution; 
vii) Activities planned for the year as aligned with the scheme guidelines; 
a) Details of studies planned and timelines for completion; 
b) Details of trainings planned for the year with clear role matrix for the different 
institutions; 
c) Broad targets for subsidy disbursement and number of enterprises booth 
groups and individuals; 
d) Broad list of clusters district wise; 
e) Listing of SHGs/FPOs/Cooperatives in the State, identified as potential 
stakeholders in the programme; 
f) Abstract of Branding and Marketing plans for the products. 
viii) Detailed cost estimates and budgets for all the activities for the year; 
ix) Detailed flow chart of implementing the activities planned; 
x) Stakeholder matrix with clear roles and responsibilities earmarked for each 
person. 
11.3 PIP is a planning & budgeting exercise. After the approval of PIP, States should 
go ahead for incurring expenditure for the items subject to the delegation of powers 
given to the States. 
11.4 State Level Approval Committee is empowered to sanction expenditure for 
individual items up to Rs.10 lakh and any proposal for expenditure above Rs.10 
lakh should be sent to MoFPI for approval. That would include DPRs for projects 
with grant above Rs 10 lakh, expenditure on State Level Technical Institution that 
exceeds Rs 10 lakh, etc. 
11.5 In case of NIFTEM and IIFPT, after approval of their PIP, the existing delegation 
of powers within the organization should be used for incurring expenditure up to 
Rs.10 lakh. Any proposal for incurring any expenditure above Rs.10 lakh should 
be sent to MoFPI for approval, as a specific proposal. 
 
12.0 Disbursement of Funds 
 
12.1 The scheme is a centrally sponsored scheme with the following sharing of 
resources between the Centre and the States: 

28 
 
i) 
Centre-State share at 60:40; 
ii) 90:10 sharing between center and Himalayan and North Eastern States; 
iii) UTs with legislature sharing would be 60:40 between the Centre and the 
States; 
iv) UTs without legislature 100% funds would be provided by the Central 
Government. 
12.2 The following components would be met 100% by the Central Government: 
i) 
Capacity buildings & training; 
ii) Administrative cost of national PMU for MoFPI; 
iii) Training support in terms of audio-visual, development of print material, 
development of modules etc. at the national level; 
iv) MIS; 
v) Development of technologies, products, etc; 
vi) Support to national level partner institutions; 
vii) Promotional activities at the national level; 
viii) Any other expenditure made directly by Govt. of India would be borne 100% 
by MOFPI. 
12.3 Expenditure in the first year, whether incurred by the Centre or the States would 
be borne 100% by the Govt. of India. This is being done because the Scheme is 
launched after the State budgets have been approved. Therefore, the States may 
be able to provide funding only after Supplementary Budgets are approved. The 
expenditure made in the first year would be adjusted in 60:40 ratio in the funds 
being transferred to the States equally in the next four years. 
12.4 The funds would be provided to the States based on the approved PIP in two 
installments in a year after Utilization Certificate (UC) for the installments other 
than the immediate previous release, have been given. There would be no such 
requirement of UC for the funds transferred in the year 2020-21. 
12.5 To meet administrative expenditure for PMUs, studies & training, grant of would be 
provided to the States in the second/third quarter of 2020-21. Subsequently, after 
the approval of PIP, funds would be provided for the full year 2020-21 to the States 
in a single installment. 
12.7 Allocation for Scheduled Caste (SC)/ Scheduled Tribe (ST)/ North Eastern 
Region (NER) 
12.7.1 Specific allocations for SC/ST and NER would be made in the budget allocations 
under the Scheme. These funds would be allocated to the States based on 
population of SC/ST in the States. Such SC/ST allocations could only be utilized 

29 
 
for giving benefits under the Scheme to the units owned by SC/ST persons 
respectively. In case of Groups, such funds could be utilized only if more than 50% 
of the members of such groups belong to SC/ST community. In case of North 
Eastern States, allocations would be made under the Scheme to comply with the 
norms of using such funds in such States. 
 
13.0 Credit Linkage 
 
13.1 The main expenditure under the Scheme is credit linked grant @35% for the for 
micro food processing enterprises subject to a maximum of Rs.10 lakh. 
Additionally, credit linked grant is being provided to groups @35% for capital 
investment, credit linked grant for common infrastructure @ 35%. These grants 
would be transferred to the lending bank after sanction of the loan by the bank. 
 
13.2 At the national level, a Nodal bank would be appointed for disbursement of subsidy 
to the banks and liaison with the banks. 
13.3 The bank sanctioning the loan would open a mirror account in the name of the 
beneficiary. The lending bank would report the fact of sanction of loan to the Nodal 
Bank at the national level. After receipt of this information, Central and State 
Government should respectively transfer 60% and 40% of its share of grant to the 
Nodal Bank. The Nodal Bank would transfer 60% of the Central share of the grant 
and 40% of the State share of the grant together to the concerned lending Bank 
branch. That Bank branch should place this amount in the mirror-bank account of 
the beneficiary. The lending bank should disburse sanction loan amount in 
accordance with normal banking practice to the beneficiary/supplier. 
13.4 If after a period of three years from the disbursement of last tranche of the loan, 
the beneficiary account is still standard, and the unit is operational, this grant 
amount would be adjusted in the bank account of the beneficiary. If the account 
becomes NPA prior to three years from the date of disbursement of the loan, the 
grant amount would be adjusted by the Bank towards repayment by the 
beneficiary. If the grant amount is adjusted after three years against the loan 
amount in case of standard account, no interest would be payable by the borrower 
on the portion of the loan disbursed by the Bank equal to the grant amount from 
the date of receipt of the grant amount by the lending bank. 
 
13.5 Benefit of credit guarantee coverage for loans offered under this Scheme should 
be provided to the borrower under the Credit Guarantee Trust for Micro & Small 
Enterprises through the National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company under their 
usual terms & conditions. Interest subvention of 2% under the Interest Subvention 
Scheme for incremental credit to MSMEs 2018 would also be available to the 
borrowers on the outstanding balance. 

30 
 
13.6 It should be ensured by the SNA that the applications are forwarded to the banks 
on a regular basis rather than forwarding a bunch of them together on a monthly 
or quarterly basis. 
 
13.7 The proposals should be forwarded to the bank branches along with basic KYC of 
the applicant. To minimize the processing time, applications should be forwarded 
to the banks along with all the requisite documents required for loan applications 
such as lease/ownership documents of land for setting up the unit/machinery, 
registration and necessary Government clearances, etc. Applications should carry 
complete project details and the DPR should be commensurate with the economic 
viability of the locality. Project cost should be a realistic figure based on a 
reasonable assessment of the economic viability of the project. 
 
14.0 MIS 
 
14.1 The Scheme would to be monitored and the entire flow of data and approval of 
proposals, etc. would take place on an online system. An MIS would be developed 
by MoFPI for this purpose. The following information flow/approvals would take 
place on MIS: 
 
i) 
Proposals for PIP sent by the States and their approval including any changes 
by MoFPI; 
ii) Proposal of PIP by national level training institutions of their approval including 
any changes; 
iii) Application for loans submitted by individual micro food processing 
enterprises; 
iv) Uploading of DPRs and details of handholding support provided; 
v) Details of training support provided to individual Units; 
vi) Forwarding of loan proposals to the banks; 
vii) Uploading of details of sanction of loan by the banks; 
viii) Any payment made to any person or agency including groups and 
maintenance of accounts; 
ix) Any support provided in terms of training, hand holding to groups and 
individuals; 
x) A ledger should be there for each individual and group selected under the 
Scheme. This ledger should provide details of all the support to the individual 
and group, details their economic activities, disbursement of loans etc; 

31 
 
xi) All payments made by SNA/ MoFPI under the Scheme to any entity should be 
entered into MIS. All activities undertaken under the Scheme should be 
entered into the MIS; 
xii) MIS would be developed by MoFPI. All expenditure for development, 
maintenance and monitoring would be met by MoFPI under the Scheme. 
 
15.0 Empanelment of Expert Institutions 
 
15.1 A large number of institutions, both in Government and private exist with expertise 
in marketing, research, product development, packaging, branding, training, 
handholding support, etc. For each of these activities, MoFPI would empanel 
institutions at the National level, whose services could be utilized by the States. 
The empanelment would be carried out by a transparent process for evaluation of 
expertise in the field. Award of work to these empaneled institutions by the States 
should be done after inviting financial proposals for the task involved by them. 
 
16.0 
Convergence Framework 
 
16.1 Food Processing Enterprises being supported under the Scheme would be eligible 
for benefits under the following Government Schemes: 
 
i) 
National Rural Livelihood Mission – providing seed capital, training, 
handholding support and interest subvention to SHGs; 
ii) Start-up Village Entrepreneurship Programme (SVEP) –It is a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme, a part of NRLM, provides capital and technical support to 
rural start-ups through training, handholding and support through Community 
Enterprises Fund (CEF) as a loan up to Rs.1 lakh for individual entrepreneur 
and Rs.5 lakh for group entrepreneurs at 12% interest; 
iii) Interest Subvention Scheme for incremental credit to MSMEs 2018 – 2% 
interest subvention on outstanding balance; 
iv) Credit Guarantee Trust Fund for Micro & Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) for 
collateral free loan up to Rs 2 crore; 
v) PM MUDRA Yojana for loan up to Rs.10 lakh; 
vi) A Scheme for Promotion of Innovation, Rural Industry and Entrepreneurship 
(ASPIRE); 
vii) Scheme for Fund for Regeneration of Rural Industry (SFURTI); 
viii) Public Procurement Policy for MSEs; 
ix) Benefits available under various other Schemes of MoFPI such as Backward 
& Forward Linkages, Agricultural Production Cluster, Cold Chain etc. would be 
used to provide support to clusters/groups. 

32 
 
x) Support from PMKVY and NRLM for skill training for SHGs, if falling within the 
guidelines would be taken. For shorter duration on site trainings, support would 
be provided from NRLM and the PM FME scheme, tailor-made for such 
purposes.