Government Agricultural schemes -Maharashtra

1. Soil Health, Soil Conservation and Fertilizers 2.Seeds 3.Irrigation 4.Training and Extension for farmers 5.Machinery and Technology 6.Agriculture Credit 7.Agricultural Insurance 8.Plant protection 9.Horticulture 10.Agricultural Marketing

1. Soil Health, Soil Conservation and Fertilizers WHAT FARMERS TO DO??
 Always use appropriate fertilizer in right quantity based on soil test.
 Must use organic manures to maintain the fertility of the soil.
 In order to get the maximum benefit of the fertilizers, always apply in root zone instead of broadcasting.
 Resort to the judicious and efficient use of Phosphatic Fertilizers for proper development of Roots/shoots and timely maturity of crops, particularly the legumes which fix atmospheric Nitrogen for the enrichment of soil.
 For reclaiming acidic soil, use lime and for saline/usar soil, use gypsum.
 Farmers desirous of adopting Participatory Organic Guarantee System (PGS – India)
Certification may form a group of at least 5 farmers and get it registered with the nearest Regional Council or Regional Centre of Organic Farming.

WHAT FARMERS CAN GET?

Sl.no Schemes Type of assistance criteria 1.
ISOPOM Supply

of gypsum/pyrite/lime/d olomite

Rs per hectare 2.
ISOPOM Supply of micronutrient elements in deficient areas Rs per hectare National Horticulture Mission Adoption of organic farming Rs 10,000 per hectare National Horticulture Mission Vermi – Compost Unit Rs 30,000 per unit (for 1-hectare area)
Work plan Organic Farming Scheme Vermi -Compost Unit Rs 2500 per unit Work plan Organic Farming Scheme Biodynamic Compost Rs 250 per unit Work plan Organic Farming Scheme C. P. P. Culture Unit Rs 250 per unit Work plan Organic Farming Scheme Polythene Vermi Bed Rs 5,000 per unit Work plan Organic Farming Scheme Promotion of Integrated Nutrient Management Rs 1000 per hectare Soil Survey & Soil Testing scheme Testing of soil samples NPK Rs 15/- per sample Micro nutrients Rs 200/- per sample PH, EC Physical & Chemical analysis Rs 250/- per sample Water testing Rs 100/- per sample National Project on Management of Soil Health and Fertility Promoting the use of organic manuring Rs 500 per hectare National Project on Management of Soil Health and Fertility Supply of lime/basic slag for reclaiming acidic soil.
Rs 500 per hectare @ 25% of cost National Project on Management of Soil Health and Fertility Promotion and distribution of micronutrient elements Rs 500 per hectare National Project on Organic Farming Establishment of compost unit from fruit and vegetable waste /agricultural waste.
Subsidy of 33% on total financial outlay for 100 TPD (tones per day) capacity up to a limit of Rs. 60 lakh (credit linked back ended subsidy).
National Project on Organic Farming Establishment of bio fertilizer and/or bio pesticide unit Subsidy of 25% on total financial outlay for 200 tons limited to Rs 40 lakh.
Integrated Cereals Development Programme Micro nutrients in wheat,Pulses, Rice 50% cost limited to Rs 500 per hectare Oilseed Production Programme Supply of Micro Nutrients in the deficient areas Assistance at 50% of the cost or Rs 500/ha.
whichever is less Centrally sponsored Sugar cane development scheme Distribution of Gypsum, micro nutriants and Green manuring

50% of the cost limited to Rs.
1000/ha.

WHOM TO CONTACT?
Nearest Office of Taluka Agriculture Officer, Sub-divisional Agriculture Officer, District Superintending Agriculture Officer, Divisional Joint Director of Agriculture Website of Agriculture Department – www.mahaagri.gov.in Kisan Call Center (Toll-Free No.) – 1800 – 180 – 1551

2.Seeds WHAT FARMERS TO DO??

 Always use recommended variety of seeds as per local climate and adopt recommended seed rate and gap.
 Replace seeds of wheat, paddy, barley, pulses (except arhar), oilseeds (except rapeseed, mustard and sunflower), maize etc. once in three years,that of arhar, rapeseed, mustard and sunflower once in two years and hybrid/BT seeds every year.
 Always procure certified seeds from authorized agencies and store the seeds in a cool, dry and clean place.
 Always use treated seeds for sowing and test for purity, quality and germination before sowing.

WHAT FARMERS CAN GET?

S.N o Crop Quantum of assistance per kilogram of seeds Scheme/Component Assistance on Distribution of Certified Seeds 1.
(i) Paddy and Wheat (i) 50% of cost or Rs 5 per kg.
(whichever is less)
Integrated Cereals Development Programme

Macro Management of Agriculture 2.
(i) Bajra, Sorghum, Ragi and Barley (ii) Hybrid Bajra/Sorghum (i) 50% of cost or Rs 8 per kg. (whichever is less)
(ii) Rs 10 IntegratedCereal Development Programme All pulses (Arhar, Moong, Urad, Lentil, Pea, Gram, Rajma and Moth)
50% of cost or Rs 12 per kg.
(whichever is less)
National Food Security Mission All oilseeds (Groundnut, Sunflower, Torea, Safflower, Mustard, Rapeseed, Til, Castor) and Maize 50% of cost or Rs 12 per kg (whichever is less)
Integrated scheme on Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil- palm and Maize.
(ISOPOM)
5.
Oil-palm Seedling 85% of the cost of oil-palm sprouts for total land holding of the farmers with a ceiling of ` 1000 per hectare.
Oil palm area expansion programme (RKVY)
Certified seeds of cotton Rs 20 Cotton Technology Mission Certified Seeds of Jute and Mesta Supply of green manuring seed Plantation of Glyricidia/ Shevari 50% of cost or Rs 12 (whichever is less)
Rs 2000 per quintal (25% subsidy)

Rs 2 per plant Jute and Mesta Technology Mission Work plan Organic Farming scheme

Work plan Organic Farming scheme For all crop – Distribution of foundation/certified seeds for production of quality seeds to improve quality of farm saved seeds 50% of cost of the seeds Seed Village Programme.
Assistance on production of foundation for certified seeds Seed Treatment 25% subsidy limited Rs 50/- ha.
25% State Govt of Maharashtra Demonstration inputs.
Rs 5000/ha. limit 25% State Govt of Maharashtra Cultivation cost as assistance for gestation period for oil palm Rs 20000/- per hectare in 4 years Oil Palm area expansion programme a. Pearl Millet Hybrid b. HYVs of other Millets Rs 30 Rs 10 Initiative for Nutritional Security through Intensive Millets Promotion (INSIMP)
Cotton Seed (i) Foundation seed production

(ii) Certified Seed production (I) Rs 50 or 50% of cost (whichever is less)

(ii)Rs 15 or 25% of cost (whichever is less)
Cotton Technology Mission Jute and Mesta (i) Foundation Seed Production

(ii) Certified Seed Production (I) Rs 30 or 50% of cost (whichever is less)
(ii) Rs 7 or 25% of cost (whichever is less)
Jute and Mesta Technology Mission Assistance for boosting seed production in private sector including individual/entrepre neurs, self-help groups etc,

Credit linked back ended capital subsidy at the rate of 25% of project cost limited to Rs 25 lakh per unit

Development and strengthening of infrastructure for Production and Distribution of Quality Seed Seed Mini kits of high yielding varieties Paddy and Wheat Mini Kits All pulses (Arhar, Moong,

National Food Security Mission

Urad, Lentil, Pea, Gram, Rajma & Moth)
All Oilseeds (Groundnut, Linseed, Sunflower, Toria, Safflower, Mustard, Rapeseed, Castor) and Maize.

Integrated Scheme on Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil- palm and Maize (ISOPOM)
Pearl Millet Hybrids and HYVs of other Millets for all crops

Initiative for Nutritional Security through Intensive Millets Promotion (INSIMP Assistance for procuring seeds storage bin of 20 qtl.
Capacity.
25% of the cost subject to maximum of Rs 2000A (33% of the cost subject to a maximum of Rs 3000/- for SC/ST farmers)
Seed Village Programme Assistance for making seed storage bin of 10 qtl.
Capacity.
25% subject to maximum of Rs 1000/- @ 33% subject to maximum of Rs

1500/- to SC/ST farmers Seed Village Programme Distribution of certified seed 50% of the cost of all crop groups or Rs 1200/Qtl whichever is less Oilseed Production Programme Production of certified seed(SVS)
Rs 1000/Qtl Oilseed Production Programme Certified and Foundation Seed Production 10% of the cost limited to Rs 4000/ha.
Centrally sponsored Sustainable Development of Sugarcane based cropping system Seed Minikit Jowar & other millets (pack 4 kg) for 0.4 ha.
Rs 200/ Minikit Intensive for Nutritional Security through Intensive Millets Promotion (INSIMP)

Seed Minikit Bajra ( Pack 1.5 kg. ) for 0.4 ha.
Rs 250/ Minikit Intensive for Nutritional Security through Intensive Millets Promotion (INSIMP)

WHOM TO CONTACT?
Nearest Office of Taluka Agriculture Officer, Sub-divisional Agriculture Officer, District Superintending Agriculture Officer, Divisional Joint Director of Agriculture Website of Agriculture Department – www.mahaagri.gov.in Kisan Call Center (Toll-Free No.) – 1800 – 180 – 1551

3.Irrigation WHAT FARMERS TO DO??

 Conserve soil and water through good agricultural practices.
 Harvest rainwater through the construction of check dams and ponds.
 Adopt crop diversification, seed production and nursery raising in water logged areas.
 Adopt drip and sprinkler irrigation system to save 30-37% water and enhance crop quality and productivity.

WHAT FARMERS CAN GET?
S.N o Type of assistance Quantum of assistance per kilogram of seeds Scheme/Component

1.
For digging pond/well Limited to Rs. 60000 Rainfed area development programme 2.
For tube well Rs. 15000 to Rs. 25000/farm family Rainfed area development programme Procurement of lift irrigation system Rs. 10000 /farm family Rainfed area development programme Pipes to carry water from the source

Rs. 15000 /farmer to the field up to 800 meters (all types of pipes PVC, HDPE and as per requirement of the farmer)

NFSM-Pulses and ISOPOM 5.
Drip irrigation system for oil palm Rs. 12450 per farmer ( 9meter x 9meter cropping density)

Oil Palm area expansion program (RKVY)
Supply of diesel pump sets for oil palm Rs. 10,000/per set Oil palm area expansion program (RKVY)
Bore-well 100% assistance limited to Rs. 30000 Extending Green Revolution to Eastern India Shallow tube wells 100% assistance limited to Rs. 12000 Extending Green Revolution to Eastern India Pump Set 50% subject to a maximum of Rs. 10000 Extending Green Revolution to Eastern India Inwell Boring Rs. 20000 Limit Extending Green Revolution to Eastern India Pipeline Rs. 20000 Limit per 300 metres Extending Green Revolution to Eastern India Pump Set Rs. 20000 Limit Extending Green Revolution to Eastern India Bullock cart Rs. 15000 limit SCP, TSP & OTSP Old well-repairing Rs. 30000 limit SCP, TSP & OTSP

WHOM TO CONTACT?
Nearest Office of Taluka Agriculture Officer, Sub-divisional Agriculture Officer, District Superintending Agriculture Officer, Divisional Joint Director of Agriculture Website of Agriculture Department – www.mahaagri.gov.in Kisan Call Center (Toll-Free No.) – 1800 – 180 – 1551

4.Training and Extension for farmers WHAT FARMERS TO DO??

 Tune into agriculture related programmes on Doordarshan (18 Regional, 1 National, 180 Low Power transmitters), FM Radio Stations (96) or even some private channels to get latest knowledge and information.
 Contact the nearest Kisan Call Centre (1800-180-1551) for answers to your specific queries through the KCC agents or through senior experts from 6 AM to 10 PM on all 365 days in a year.
 Students with prescribed qualification in Agriculture can become self-employed and provide extension services to farmers. Training is provided free of cost and 36%.Composite Subsidy is provided on loan sanctioned by the Bank for establishing agri venture (44% in case of SC/ST/ North East and Hill Regions/Women). Farmers can approach them for advice. Participate in exposure visits and training for progressive farmers. Run a Farm School. A sum of ` 29,514/- is provided for running a Farm School.
 Access Farmers’ Portal directly or through an Internet Kiosk/a Common Service Centre to get location specific information (including a package of practices, a list of dealers, crop advisories etc.)

WHAT FARMERS CAN GET?
S.N o Type of assistance Quantum of assistance per kilogram of seeds Scheme/Component

1.
Training of groups of 50-150 farmers on seed production and seed technology.
Rs. 15000/ group Seed Village programme 2.
Training of Farmers in recognized institutes (stipend, boarding, lodging and to & fro transportation cost Rs. 5200/farmer/month Post Harvest Technology Man

would be provided to farmers).
Training on plant protection measures to groups of 40 farmers Rs. 152100 Plant Protection scheme 2 days training of farmers on Vegetable Production and Related Areas.
Rs. 1500/ training/ farmer excluding transport Vegetable Initiative for Urban Clusters Farmers’ study tours Rs. 50000 per batch for 50 farmers (RKVY)
Oil palm program area expansion Training of farmers outside the state up to 50 man days/Block Rs. 1000/farmer / day which includes transportation, boarding and lodging of farmers)
ATMA Schem Training of farmers within the State (100 man days/Block).
Rs. 750/farmer/day which includes transportation, boarding and lodging of farmers)
ATMA Scheme Front line Demonstrations in selected villages by Soil Testing Laboratories.
Rs. 20000/ demonstration National Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility Demonstration on Micro Irrigation in 0.5 hectares per beneficiary.
75% of total cost provided as subsidy to farmers National Mission on Micro Irrigation Visit of Farmers to Model arms/ Institutes 40 Sugarcane grower farmers @ 50% of the cost limited to Rs. 50000 Seed Village programme WHOM TO CONTACT?
Nearest Office of Taluka Agriculture Officer, Sub-divisional Agriculture Officer, District Superintending Agriculture Officer, Divisional Joint Director of Agriculture Website of Agriculture Department – www.mahaagri.gov.in Kisan Call Center (Toll-Free No.) – 1800 – 180 – 1551

5.Machinery and Technology WHAT FARMERS TO DO??

 Use appropriate machinery/ equipment as per holding size and crop.
 Expensive equipment can be used by custom hiring/ sharing by groups of farmers.
 Conserve Resources – Use Zero-till Seed Drills, Laser Land Levelers, happy seed drill, rotavator, etc.
 Learn proper use, routine maintenance and servicing through Farm Machinery Testing and Training Institutes, KVKs etc.

WHAT FARMERS CAN GET?
S.N o Type of assistance Quantum of assistance per kilogram of seeds Scheme/Component

1.
Tractor up to 40hp Rs. 45000 and 25% of the cost which ever is less Macro Management Mode of Agriculture (MMA)
2.
Power Tiller Rs. 45,000 or 40% of the cost whichever is less for 8 BHP & above, Manually operated implements Rs. 2000 or 25% of cost whichever is less Macro Management Mode of Agriculture (MMA)
Animal driven implements Rs. 2500 Limit/ 25% of cost whichever is less Macro Management Mode of Agriculture (MMA)
Cono Weeder and other farm implements Rs. 3000 or 50% of cost whichever is less NFSM Pump Set (up to 10hp)
Rs. 10,000 or 50% of cost whichever is less NFSM Supply of improved farm implements manually operated 50% of cost limited to Rs.
2500/implement Oilseed Production Programme Distribution of P.P.
equipment manually operated 50% of cost limited to Rs.
800/equipment Oilseed Production Programme Multi crop thresher 50% of cost limited to Rs.
24000/Unit Oilseed Production Programme Setting of primary and secondary processing units for Millet crops Rs. 4 lakh for primary and secondary unit Intensive for nutritional security through Intensive Millets Promotion(INSIMP)

WHOM TO CONTACT?
Nearest Office of Taluka Agriculture Officer, Sub-divisional Agriculture Officer, District Superintending Agriculture Officer, Divisional Joint Director of Agriculture Website of Agriculture Department – www.mahaagri.gov.in Kisan Call Center (Toll-Free No.) – 1800 – 180 – 1551

6.Agriculture Credit WHAT FARMERS TO DO??
 To save themselves from the clutches of money lenders, farmers can avail loan facility from banks.
 Loan facility is available through the large network of Commercial Banks, Regional Rural Bank and Cooperative Credit Institutions in the country to fulfil the crop loan and term loan needs of the farmers.
 Ensure timely repayment of bank loan.
 Proper record of loan should be maintained by the farmer.

 Utilise the bank loan for the actual purpose for which bank loan is taken.

WHAT FARMERS CAN GET?
S.N o Type of assistance Quantum of assistance per kilogram of seeds

1.
Interest Assistance 3 % rebate on interest on timely repayment of crop loan of up to Rs. 3 lakh at an annual interest of 7 %.
2.
Need of collateral/securit y No need of collateral security for farm loan up to Rs. 1 lakh.
Kisan Credit Card Farmers can avail crop loan through Kisan Credit Card.
Loan /credit limit is decided on the basis of 3-5 years average of crop sown on cultivated land by the farmers.
Farmers are also provided cover of Rs. 50,000 maximum for accidental death.
Investment Loan Loan facility to the farmers is available for investment purposes in the areas viz. Irrigation, Agricultural Mechanization, Land Development.

WHOM TO CONTACT?
Nearest Office of Taluka Agriculture Officer, Sub-divisional Agriculture Officer, District Superintending Agriculture Officer, Divisional Joint Director of Agriculture Website of Agriculture Department – www.mahaagri.gov.in Kisan Call Center (Toll-Free No.) – 1800 – 180 – 1551

7.Agriculture Marketing WHAT FARMERS TO DO??
A farmer can get the price information of their products available on www.agmarknet.nic.in. or through Kisan Call Centres or SMS.
 Harvesting and threshing should be done at the appropriate time.
 Proper grading, packing and labelling should be done before sale for a better price.
 Transport of produce at proper market/Mandi for getting remunerative price.
 Storage of produce should be done for sale during off season for maximum profit.
 Avoid distress sale.
 The farmer in a group can form marketing cooperatives for better marketing facilities.
 Marketing cooperatives can open retail and wholesale outlets.
 Farmers can also operate cold storages and warehouses to store the produce in order to avoid distress sale.

WHAT FARMERS CAN GET?
S.N o Type of assistance Quantum of assistance per kilogram of seeds Scheme/Component

1.
Godown capacity from 100 Mtr to 30000 Mtr (50 MT for hill areas)
~ For all farmers

~ For woman farmers, their Self Help Groups, Cooperatives, entrepreneurs.

~ For other categories 25 percent subsidy of capital cost

33.33 percent subsidy of capital cost

15 percent subsidy of capital cost Grameen Bhandaran Yojana

2.
For rapid development of infrastructure projects in agriculture and allied sectors including dairy, meat fisheries and minor forest produce.

~ To develop marketing infrastructure to cater to the post harvest requirement of production and marketable surplus of various farm products.
25% of the capital cost of project up to 50 lakh on each project. In Hilly or Tribal areas or SC/ST entrepreneurs and their cooperatives

subsidy shall be 33.33% of the capital cost up to Rs. 60 lakh in each case.No proper ceiling on subsidy in respect of projects of State agencies.
Scheme for Development/ Strengthening of Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure, Grading & Standardization Awareness and Food Festival for each district Rs. 1 lakh /food festival Intensive for nutritional security through Intensive Millets Promotion (INSIMP)

WHOM TO CONTACT?
Nearest Office of Taluka Agriculture Officer, Sub-divisional Agriculture Officer, District Superintending Agriculture Officer, Divisional Joint Director of Agriculture Website of Agriculture Department – www.mahaagri.gov.in Kisan Call Center (Toll-Free No.) – 1800 – 180 – 1551