Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
Manual for District- Level Functionaries i

PREFACE

The purpose of this Development Manual for Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) is to create an enabling mechanism for improved implementation of the Scheme at the cutting edge, leading to enhanced outcomes in nature and extent.
Accordingly, it is a guide for implementation by the District Collector and key District-level functionaries, and enables quick learning, implementation modalities, roles and responsibilities of the various functionaries as well as stakeholders etc.

This Manual is prepared with inputs from a combination of sources, including interactions with the Department of Agriculture Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DAC & FW), Government of India (GoI), review of extant scheme guidelines and circulars issued by the Departmentand discussions with the key personnel involved in implementation of the Scheme.

For greater direction, the guidelines cited must be referred to for guidance and clarification on implementation from time to time.

Contents

1. Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) ........................................................ 1 1.1 About the Scheme .......................................................................... 1 1.2 Objective .................................................................................... 1 1.3 Approach .................................................................................... 1 1.4 Key Components & Major Activities ..................................................... 2 1.5 Pattern of Assistance ...................................................................... 6 1.6 Institutional Framework ................................................................... 9 1.7 Annual Action Plan under PKVY .........................................................10 2. Roles and Responsibilities of Key District- Level Functionaries ..............................11 2.1 PKVY Implementation – Key District Level Functionaries ............................11 2.2 District Collector/ District Magistrate ..................................................11 2.3 Key Functionaries – PKVY Implementation at the district level ....................12 2.3 Role of Local Groups ......................................................................16 Certification Process by Regional Councils (RCs) ..................................................17 PKVY - IMPLEMENTATION MONITORING PROFORMA (MONTHLY REPORT) .......................18 [For Regional Councils based on Annual Action Plan]* ............................................18 Abbreviations .......................................................................................19 Endnotes and References .............................................................................20 1. Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)

1.1 About the Scheme

The Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), launched in 2015, is an extended component of Soil Health Management (SHM) under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS), National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA)1. PKVY aims at supporting and promoting organic farming, in turn resulting in improvement of soil health.

The scheme promotes Participatory Guarantee System (PGS) For India (PGS- India)2 form of organic certification that is built on mutual trust, locally relevant and mandates the involvement of producers and consumers in the process of certification. PGS – India operates outside the framework of “Third Party Certification3”.

Funding pattern under the scheme is in the ratio of 60:40 by the Central and State Governments respectively. In case of North Eastern and Himalayan States, Central Assistance is provided in the ratio of 90:10 (Centre: State) and for Union Territories, the assistance is 100%.

The Scheme targets to form 10,000 clusters of 20 ha each and bring nearly two lakh hectares of agricultural area under organic farming by 2017-18.

1.2 Objective4

The objective is to produce agricultural products free from chemicals and pesticides residues by adopting eco- friendly, low- cost technologies. Key Thrust areas of PKVY in promoting organic farming include the following:

 Promote organic farming among rural youth/ farmers/ consumers/ traders  Disseminate latest technologies in organic farming  Utilize the services of experts from public agricultural research system in India  Organize a minimum of one cluster demonstration in a village

1.3 Approach

PKVY is implemented in a time frame of three years in line with the PGS-India’s prescribed conversion period of 36 months from conventional farm to organic.
Accordingly, PKVY promotes organic farming through a cluster approach to adopt PGS Certification. PGS Certification facilitates farmers to certify their organic produce, label and market their products domestically.

Major Features of the Scheme

The cluster chosen for Organic Farming shall be 20 ha or 50 acres in extent and in as contiguous a form as possible.

Development Role Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
 Total financial assistance available for a 20 ha or 50 acre cluster shall be a maximum of Rs. 10 lakhs for farmer members and Rs. 4.95 lakh for mobilization and PGS Certification with a subsidy ceiling of one hectare per farmer

 Of the total number of farmers in a cluster, a minimum of 65 percent farmers should be allocated to small and marginal category, to be fulfilled at cluster level as far as practicable and where not possible to be satisfied at Mandal/Block/ Taluka or District level.

 At least 30% of the budget allocations need to be earmarked for women beneficiaries/ farmers5

1.4 Key Components & Major Activities

Figure 1: Key components of PKVY

1.4.1 Model Organic Cluster Demonstrations6

Model Organic Cluster Demonstrations aim at boosting/ promoting organic farming among rural youth/ farmers/ consumers/ traders by creating awareness on the latest technologies of organic farming. These are conducted at the farmer’s field in clusters of 20 ha or 50 acres under PKVY.

Implementing Agencies (IAs) primarily are the Zonal Councils7 of National Centre for Organic Farming (NCOF), Participatory Guarantee System (PGS) registered Regional Councils (RCs) and other Public Sector Organisations of DAC & FW.

Such demonstrations are actively supervised by the experts / scientists from Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), Central Agricultural Universities (CAUs), Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), National Seed Corporation (NSC), Small Farmers Agribusiness Consortium (SFAC), Farmers Producers Organisations (FPOs) etc.

A Project Demonstration Team may be formed by these Implementing Agencies (IAs) for improved focus and timely implementation.

Each institution shall conduct three model organic cluster demonstrations in surrounding villages with a minimum of one cluster per village in a year.
Model Organic Cluster Demonstrations Model Organic Farm

Development Ro

 100 percent gra  Regional Counc eligible for 90% project cost

Funds for the activity division of DAC & FW Regional Councils/ Sta

Major activities unde Figure 2.

Figure 2: Activities u

1.4.1.1 Adoption of Pa

(A)
Activities

The first stage in the cluster approach, for

Partic To promote organic farm Certification system calle implemented by Departm Government of India thro seven Zonal Councils.

Adoption of Participatory Guarantee System (PSG)
Certification • • Manure Management and Biological Nitrogen Harvesting • • • • le Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (P Financial Assistance

ant for ICAR Institutions, SAUs, CAUs, KVKs, NSC cils (RCs) of the National Centre of Organic Farm % assistance with at least 10 percent contributio y are provided by the Integrated Nutrient W, upon submission of action plans by th ates.
r Model Organic Cluster Demonstrations ar under Model Organic Cluster Demonstratio articipatory Guarantee System (PGS) Certi e PKVY, the adoption of PGS certification which financial assistance is provided.
cipatory Guarantee System (PGS) of Certificatio

ming and domestic organic market, a free / no co ed Participatory Guarantee system-India (PGS-In ment of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers W ough National Centre of Organic Farming (NCOF)
Mobilization of farmers/ local people t in 20 ha or 50 acres for PGS Certificatio PGS Certification and Quality Control • Conversion of land into organic • Integrated Manure Management • Custom Hiring Centres • Packing, Labelling and Branding of p PKVY)
, SFAC, FPOs etc ming (NCOF) are n to the total Management (INM)
he Zonal Councils/ re as shown in the

ns of PKVY fication8 is done through a on ost domestic organic ndia) is being Welfare (DAC&FW), ), Ghaziabad and its o form clusters on roduce

Development Role Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
In addition to these Zonal Councils, “Regional Councils (RC)9” under PKVY also are authorized to work under PGS-India Programme. Logos used in PGS- India Organic Certification Programme are as follows:

Logo used while marketing products produced from the fields “Under Conversion” Logo used while marketing products produced from the fields “Completely converted into Organic”

Major components of assistance in adoption of PGS certification are as follows (Figure 3 & Figure 4).

 Mobilization of farmers/ local people to form cluster in 20 ha or 50 acres for PGS Certification

Farmers in the identified clusters are organized as “Local Groups10” under PGS Certification. Lead Resource Person (LRP), the lead farmer is identified from each Cluster or Local Group (LG) by the RCs.

Figure 3: Mobilization of farmers for PGS Certification

 PGS Certification and Quality Control

Figure 4: PGS Certification and Quality Control

Mobilisation of farmers to form clusters/ Local Groups (LGs) viz conduct of Farmer meetings Formation of cluster and farmers pledge to adopt PGS Exposure visits to cluster members to organic farming fields for practical knowledge on organic farming Trainings of cluster members on organic farming within six months of registration Identification of Lead Resource Person (LRP)
from the Cluster / Local Group.
Training on PGS Certification for LRPs Training to LRPs on soil sample collection and quality control Online registration of farmers in PGS Certification System Soil sample collection by LRPs and testing Process Documentation by RCs Inspection of fields by LRPs Residue analysis of samples in National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL)
Issue of PGS certification by RCs

Development Role Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
1.4.1.2 Manure Management and Biological Nitrogen Harvesting11

(A)
Activities Once the clusters or local groups adopt PGS certification, Regional Councils (RCs)
and other Implementing Agencies (IAs) need to submit Annual Action Plan (AAP) for conversion of land into organic. The action plan would comprise of the following activities:

 Conversion of land into Organic o Introduction of suitable organic cropping systems o Construction and operation of organic input production units; Pachagavya12, Beejamruth13 and Jeevamruth14 etc.
o Biological Nitrogen Harvest Planting (Glircidia, Sesbania, etc.)
o Botanical extracts production units.

 Integrated manure management It involves production, procurement and application of o Liquid bio- fertilizers to increase crop- production o Liquid bio- pesticides for suppression of disease in crops o Phosphate Rich Organic Manure (PROM) to meet phosphorous/ organic carbon and other micro- nutrients deficiency in soil o Vermi-compost

 Custom Hiring Centre (CHC)
CHCs facilitate hiring of agricultural implements (where applicable under Sub- Mission on Agricultural Mechanisation (SMAM)) for processing/ grading/ cleaning/ threshing of organic produce and land preparation etc.

 Packing, Labeling and branding of organic products of cluster In this stage, packing materials are procured, holograms and labels are prepared.
In addition, branding of organic products takes place. The organic produce is then transported to markets and organic fairs.

1.4.2 Model Organic Farm15

The Model Organic Farm aims at demonstrating conversion of conventional land into organic farming practices in one hectare parcels. This is to spread the information on the latest technologies of various units of organic inputs production through exposure visits to farmers.

As several of the central and state government organisations and other public sector organisations have their own farms for demonstration of technologies in various farming practices, these institutions shall develop model Organic Farms.

Maximum three model organic farm demonstrations shall be allocated to each organisation with a minimum of one farm in one institution in one year.

Development Role Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
The IAs and funding pattern of model organic farm are similar to that of the Model Organic Cluster Demonstrations.

1.5 Pattern of Assistance

A total assistance of Rs. 14.95 lakhs is available per cluster for mobilization, adoption of PGS certification and manure management. Maximum assistance of Rs.
10 lakhs per cluster of 50 acres or 20 ha (or) subject to a maximum of Rs. 50,000 per farmer per ha (maximum assistance per farmer is one ha) is available to the farmer members for activities under Manure Management and Biological Nitrogen Harvesting. Of the total assistance, Rs. 4.95 lakhs per cluster is available to Implementing Agencies (IAs) for mobilization and adoption of PGS Certification and Quality Control

The sub- component- wise financial assistance is illustrated in Tables 1 and 216.

Table 1: PKVY - Pattern of Assistance to a cluster of 20 ha or 50 acres for 3 years17 S.
No.
Component / Sub- Component Pattern of Assistance (in Rs)
1st Year 2nd Year 3rd Year TOTAL 1.
Adoption of Participatory Guarantee System (PGS) of Certification 80,000 - - 80,000 2.
PGS Certification and Quality Control 36,950 115,050 111,700 263,700 3.
Conversion of land into organic 2,50,000 1,00,000 1,00,000 4,50,000 4.
Integrated Manure Management 3,25,000 50,000 - 3,75,000 5.
Custom Hiring Centre (CHC) charges 15,000 15,000 15,000 45,000 6.
Packing Labelling and branding or organic products of cluster - 2,18,830 62,500 2,81,330

Grand Total

1,495,030

Table 2: PKVY - Detailed Pattern of Assistance to a cluster of 20 ha or 50 acres for 3 years S.
No.
Component / Sub- Component Pattern of Assistance (in Rs)
1st Year 2nd Year 3rd Year TOTAL 1.
Adoption of Participatory Guarantee System (PGS) of Certification 80,000 - - 80,000

Farmer meetings 10,000

10,000

Exposure Visits to farmers in the clusters 10,000

10,000

Training of cluster members on organic farming 60,000

60,000 2.
PGS Certification and Quality Control 36,950 115,050 111,700 263,700

2 day Training on PGS Certification (Rs. 200 per LRP per day)
400

3 day training to LRPs (Rs. 250 per 750

Development Role Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
S.
No.
Component / Sub- Component Pattern of Assistance (in Rs)
1st Year 2nd Year 3rd Year TOTAL LRP per day)

Online registration of farmers (Rs.
100 per member in a cluster of 50 members)

5,000 5,000 10,000

Soil Sample Collection and testing (14 samples in year 1 and 2 and 12 in year 3 at Rs. 300 per sample)
4,200 4,200 3,600 12,000

Process documentation for PGS Certification (Rs. 100 per member for 50 members)
5,000 5,000 5,000 15,000

Field inspections (3 inspections per cluster in a year at Rs. 400 per inspection)
1,200 1,200 1,200 3,600

Residue analysis of samples in NABL (8 samples per cluster per year at Rs. 10,000 per sample)

80,000 80,000 160,000

Certification Charges 2,000 2,000

Administrative expenses for certification 26,150 16,900 16,900 59,950 3.
Conversion of land into organic 2,50,000 1,00,000 1,00,000 4,50,000

Conversion (Rs. 1000/ acre for 50 acres)
50,000 50,000 50,000 150,000

Introduction of cropping system, organic seed procurement and raising organic nursery (Rs. 500 per acre per year for 50 acres)
25,000 25,000 25,000 75,000

Organic input production units (Rs.
1500 per unit per acre for 50 acres)
75,000

75,000

Biological Nitrogen Harvesting Planting (Rs. 2000 per acre for 50 acres)
50,000 25,000 25,000 100,000

Botanical extracts production unit (Rs. 1000 per unit per acre for 50 acres)
50,000

50,000 4.
Integrated Manure Management 3,25,000 50,000 - 3,75,000

Liquid Bio-fertilizer (Rs. 500 per acre for 50 acres)
25,000

25,000

Liquid Bio-pesticides (Rs. 500 per acre for 50 acres)

25,000

25,000

Adoption of local practice for natural pest control (Rs. 500 per acre for 50 acres)

25,000

25,000

Phosphate Rich Organic Manure (PROM) (Rs. 1000 per acre for 50 acres)
50,000

50,000

Development Role Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
S.
No.
Component / Sub- Component Pattern of Assistance (in Rs)
1st Year 2nd Year 3rd Year TOTAL

Vermi compost (Rs. 5,000 per unit and 50 units)
250,000

250,000 5.
Custom Hiring Centre (CHC)
charges 15,000 15,000 15,000 45,000

Agricultural Implements 15,000 15,000 15,000 45,000 6.
Packing Labelling and branding or organic products of cluster - 2,18,830 62,500 2,81,330

Packing material with PGS logo + Hologram printing (Rs. 2,500 per acre for 50 acres)

62,500 62,500 125,000

Transportation charges for Organic produce for marketing (Rs. 800 per farmer/ year/cluster)
40,000 40,000 40,000 120,000

Organic fairs (Maximum assistance of Rs. 36,330 per cluster)

36,330

36,330

Table 3: Norms of assistance for Model Organic Farm S. No.
Name of the Component Norms of Assistance (Rs per ha for 3 years)
1.
Establishment of Organic Units

Liquid Bio- fertilisers unit 1,250 Liquid Bio- pesticides unit 1,250 Natural pest control mechanism 1,250 Phosphate Rich Organic Manure (PROM) unit 2,500 Vermi- compost unit (Size 7” x 3 x 1”)
5,000 per unit Organic seed/ nursery raising, procurement 3,750 Production units (Panchagavya/ Beejamruth/ Jeevamruth)
3,750 per ha per unit Green Manuring/ Biological Nitrogen Harvest Planting 5,000 Botanical extracts production units 2,500 2.
Mobilisation of farmers

Meetings and discussion of farmers 10,000 Exposure visit of farmers 10,000 Organic fairs 1,500 Custom hiring centre for agricultural implements 2,250

Total 50,000 Note: 5% of total amount allocation may be used for labour/ land preparation or other miscellaneous items

Development Role Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
1.6 Institutional Framework

Figure 5: PKVY – Institutional Framework

(A) National Level Implementation

PKVY is being implemented by the Organic Farming cell of the Integrated Nutrient Management (Division) of Department of Agriculture; Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW). National Advisory Committee (NAC)18 chaired by the Joint Secretary (INM) is the apex policy making body for the scheme. Executive Secretary of the NAC is the Director, National Centre of Organic Farming (NCOF).

Members of the NAC include Regional Directors of Regional Centre of Organic Farming, Additional Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner (INM), Heads of Zonal Councils, Representatives of Regional Councils and Farmers & Consumers.

Apart from the DAC&FW, given the expertise of agricultural research system in the country, involvement of ICAR, SAUs, CAUs, KVKs, NSC, SFAC etc are being emphasized upon.

(B) State Level Implementation

At the State level, State Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has been implementing the scheme with the involvement of Regional Councils that are registered under PGS- India Certification Programme.

(C) District Level Implementation

Regional Councils (RCs) within the district anchor the implementation of PKVY. A district may have one or multiple Regional Councils that are legally registered under Societies Act/ Public Trust Act/ Cooperative Act or Companies Act.
NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE Department of Agriculture; Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW)
State Department of Agriculture & Cooperation Regional Councils (RCs)

 Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)
 State Agricultural Universities (SAUs)
 Central Agricultural Universities (CAUs)
 Krishi Vikas Kendras (KVKs)
 National Seed Corporation (NSC)
 Small Farmers Agribusiness Consortium (SFAC)

Development Ro

Existing NGOs, Org Government, Officer consumers, traders, Groups with three ye RCs. RCs are approv Certification Program be encouraged to com

1.7 Annual Action

Adoption of PGS cer programme and the (AAP) to the State De DAC&FW. Upon appro the Centre, funds are Councils.

On release of funds f Regional Councils rec Groups/ Farmers is progress of activities c

Tentative timelines fo Districts/ Regional Co Figure 6: An

By March Submission of Annual Action Plan by Regional Councils to States le Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (P ganic Certification service providers of rs of the State Department of Agricu retailers, societies, Grama Panchayats, F ars of standing in PGS programme are allo ved by the Zonal Councils identified for mme, to begin with. In due course, Local G me forward with their own RCs.
Plan under PKVY rtification and quality control under PKVY Regional Councils (RCs) need to submit A partment of Agriculture and in turn to the oval of the consolidated action plans of RCs e being released to the respective States fol from the Centre and the prescribed State ceive funds for operations. Transfer of fu being carried out by the Regional Counc carried out by the Local Groups.
or preparation and submission of Annual A uncils is as follows (Figure 6).
nnual Action Plan under PKVY – Tentative T ***

By mid April Consolidation of Annual Plans at the State level and submission to MoA By May Approval and release of funds by the Centre PKVY)
f State/ Central ulture, producers, Farmers and Local owed to register as r the PGS – India Groups (LGs) would Y is a three year Annual Action Plan INM Division of the from the States by llowed by Regional share of 40%, the unds to the Local cils, based on the Action Plans by the

Timelines By mid May Release of funds to the Regional Councils

Development Role Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
2. Roles and Responsibilities of Key District- Level Functionaries

2.1 PKVY Implementation – Key District Level Functionaries

District – level functionaries have a major role to play in effective implementation of PKVY. Organization structure of key personnel involved in implementation of PKVY is shown in the Figure 7.

Figure 7: PKVY – Organization Structure at the district level

2.2 District Collector/ District Magistrate

The District Collector/ District Magistrate can provide overall direction and guidance for implementation of PKVY. The Collector or the Magistrate can play a major role in motivating farmers to adopt organic farming. He or she also can oversee timely implementation of the scheme, especially the procurement of organic inputs and conduct of training programs and exposure visits for the Local Groups (LGs) and farmers.

For greater focus in implementation, Districts constitute District Level Executive Committee (DLEC) chaired by the District Collector/ District Magistrate or the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of Zilla Parishad (ZP). District Agriculture Officer (DAO) at the cadre of Joint Director, Agriculture/ Deputy Director, Agriculture (JDA/ DDA)
can act as Member Secretary of DLEC with members from line departments including horticulture, animal husbandry, organic input suppliers, etc. DLECs exist in few States already.
District Collector/ District Magistrate / Chief Executive Officer of Zilla Parishad/ District Council Regional Council (s) at the district / sub district level level Joint Director, Agriculture (JDA) /Deputy Director, Agriculture (DDA) /PD, ATMA / NGOs/ Societies/ LGs with 3 years of standing/ Producers/ Consumers Mandal/ Cluster/ Village/ Gram Panchayat Level Agriculture Officer/ Assistant Agriculture Officer/ Agriculture Extension Officer/ Village Agriculture Worker/ Agriculture Supervisor / Surviellance Inspector (SI) of RCs

Development Role Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
Table 4: Roles and Responsibilities of District Collector/ District Magistrate as the Chairman of DLEC (if existing / constituted/ planned to be constituted)
Role Responsibilities PLANNING

 Facilitate preparation of Annual Action Plans (AAPs) by Regional Councils (RCs)
IMPLEMENTATION

 Motivate and encourage farmers to adopt organic farming under PGS – India Certification Programme  Scrutinize Annual Action Plan (AAP) submitted by the Regional Council and submit to the State  Approve micro- level guidelines at the district level for implementation of various interventions, procurement of inputs, unit costs, identification of fields/ research institutes for exposure visits etc  Approve Local Groups (LGs) proposed to be registered under PGS certification by the Regional Councils (RCs)
MONITORING

 Ensure timely implementation of the programme along with compliance to PGS – Operational Manual  Ensure that the field inspections are carried out by the District Agriculture Officer, as prescribed in the State Guidelines  Organize monthly review meetings with RCs and take stock of implementation  Ensure submission of a consolidated monthly progress report of all RCs to the State by 10th of every month  Scrutinize annual reports/ activity reports prepared by the RCs to be submitted to Zonal Council of National Centre of Organic Farming (NCOF)

2.3 Key Functionaries – PKVY Implementation at the district level

In most of the States, Joint Director, Agriculture (JDA) or Deputy Director, Agriculture (DDA) is registered as Regional Council, to facilitate registration of Local Groups (LGs) for PGS – India Certification and quality control. In some states, agencies and societies have been empanelled to administer the scheme. In few other States, the scheme is implemented through Project Director (PD), Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) at the district level.

Table 5: Roles and Responsibilities of District/ Block/ Village level Officers

District/ Sub District Level Mandal/ Cluster / Gram Panchayat/ Village Level Role / Officer Responsible Regional Council (s)

[Joint Director, Agriculture (JDA)
/Deputy Director, Agriculture (DDA)
/PD, ATMA / NGOs/ Societies/ LGs with 3 years of standing/ Producers/ Consumers]

[Agriculture Officer/ Assistant Agriculture Officer/ Agriculture Extension Officer/ Village Agriculture Worker/ Agriculture Supervisor / Surveillance Inspector (SI) of RCs]

PLANNING PREPARATION OF ANNUAL ACTION PLAN  New Local Groups (LGs)
 Prepare Annual Action Plan (AAP)
for the year including the number of Local Groups (LGs) that are planned to be registered, no of farmers to be involved, no of trainings and exposure visits  New Local Groups (LGs)
 Provide inputs to RCs for preparation of Annual Action Plan (AAP)

 Existing Local Groups (LGs) for 2nd and 3rd year of

Development Role Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
District/ Sub District Level Mandal/ Cluster / Gram Panchayat/ Village Level Role / Officer Responsible Regional Council (s)

[Joint Director, Agriculture (JDA)
/Deputy Director, Agriculture (DDA)
/PD, ATMA / NGOs/ Societies/ LGs with 3 years of standing/ Producers/ Consumers]

[Agriculture Officer/ Assistant Agriculture Officer/ Agriculture Extension Officer/ Village Agriculture Worker/ Agriculture Supervisor / Surveillance Inspector (SI) of RCs]

planned etc

 Existing Local Groups (LGs) for 2nd and 3rd year of implementation

 Prepare action plan for conversion of land into organic implementation  Encourage LGs to prepare annual plan for conversion of land into organic (majorly the inputs required)

IMPLEMENTATION MOBILIZATION OF FARMERS  Encourage farmers to adopt organic farming

 Strategize and execute publicity campaigns on organic farming in the district / area of operation

 Sensitize farmers on the need for taking up organic farming

 Identify farmers for registration into PKVY clusters / Local Groups (LGs) under PGS- India certification

 Ensure adequate participation from women farmers

 Collect application form of Local Groups (LGs) for registration under PGS – India programme19

 Ensure Local Groups (LGs) take willingness of the farmers for registration in the prescribed format20 REGISTRATION OF CLUSTERS/ LOCAL GROUPS (LGs)
 Enter into an agreement with RCs21

 Register Local Groups (LGs) and issue User ID and password for data uploading on PGS – India website

 Facilitate local groups in data uploading on PGS website, if local group do not have access to computer and internet

 Organize farmers into PKVY clusters and facilitate registration as a Local Group

 Verify relevant documents of the farmers and recommend to the RC for registration

 Ensure farmers take pledge to abide by the group norms and adopt organic farming22

 Identify Lead Resource Person (LRP) for each group

Development Role Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
District/ Sub District Level Mandal/ Cluster / Gram Panchayat/ Village Level Role / Officer Responsible Regional Council (s)

[Joint Director, Agriculture (JDA)
/Deputy Director, Agriculture (DDA)
/PD, ATMA / NGOs/ Societies/ LGs with 3 years of standing/ Producers/ Consumers]

[Agriculture Officer/ Assistant Agriculture Officer/ Agriculture Extension Officer/ Village Agriculture Worker/ Agriculture Supervisor / Surveillance Inspector (SI) of RCs]

PGS CERTIFICATION AND QUALITY CONTROL  Organize sufficient training to the farmers on organic farming activity

 Assist in preparation of annual plan by LGs

 Handhold LGs in packing, marketing, logo preparation, transportation etc.

 Certificate Approval Committee of the RC to issue grant of approval for certification

 Issue Scope Certificate to LGs along with the PGS logos, based on their status of implementation  Organize trainings (3 per LG in a year) in association with experts

 Upload data of individual farmer inputs used, cropping pattern followed, organic manures and fertilizers used for PGS Certification in PGS India portal

 Assist the LRP in writing the individual farmers diary/ history sheet in the prescribed format23

 Guide LGs in identifying peer farmer appraisers (minimum of 3 in a group) and conduct peer appraisals24

 Inspect farmers’ fields and submit Surveillance Reports to RCs for certification

 Assist LGs to prepare and submit Summary Worksheet25 to facilitate certification CONVERSTION OF LAND INTO ORGANIC  Facilitate procurement and planting of the Biological Nitrogen Harvest Planting (Gliricidia, Sesbania etc.) by the farmers

 Facilitate residue analysis and soil testing of samples through National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) labs

 Document with photographs on conversion of land into organic

 Recommend to the RC for transfer of subsidy to farmers

 Train farmers in preparation of organic inputs

 Ensure planting of the biological nitrogen harvesting plants is done as per guideline around the farmer’s field ORGANIC INPUTS  Make farmers aware of organic inputs including Panchagavya, Beejamruth and Jeevamruth and their benefits

 Assess the organic input requirement (liquid biofertilizers, biopesticides and PROM) in the area of operation (district/ sub district) and initiate procurement process

 Sensitize LGs and farmers on vermicompost production  Ensure farmers undertake production of organic inputs including Panchagavya, Beejamruth and Jeevamruth

 Ensure distribution of organic inputs to the Local Groups (LGs)
and organic farmers

 Organize trainings to the farmers on vermicompost production

Development Role Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
District/ Sub District Level Mandal/ Cluster / Gram Panchayat/ Village Level Role / Officer Responsible Regional Council (s)

[Joint Director, Agriculture (JDA)
/Deputy Director, Agriculture (DDA)
/PD, ATMA / NGOs/ Societies/ LGs with 3 years of standing/ Producers/ Consumers]

[Agriculture Officer/ Assistant Agriculture Officer/ Agriculture Extension Officer/ Village Agriculture Worker/ Agriculture Supervisor / Surveillance Inspector (SI) of RCs]

 Encourage LGs and farmers to use the services of Custom Hiring Centres (CHCs) functioning in the district / sub district  Encourage LGs and farmers to use the services of Custom Hiring Centres (CHCs) functioning in the district / sub district PACKING, LABELLING AND BRANDING OF ORGANIC PRODUCE  Handhold LGs in marketing their organic produce/ products

 Help LGs design their product packing and logos

 Help LGs participate in organic trade fairs  Handhold LGs in marketing and transportation of organic produce to market places.

FUND MANAGEMENT  Submit annual reports on PGS activity in a prescribed format to State Department of Agriculture

 Ensure Aadhar enabled Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) for transfer of subsidies to the farmers

 Submit Utilization Certificate (UC) to State Department of Agriculture by the end of the Financial Year

MONITORING & REPORTING MONITORING & REPORTING  Carry out field inspections as prescribed in the State Guidelines

 Update the status of implementation to DLEC (if existing) and the State Department of Agriculture by 10th of every month

 Maintain relevant vouchers for the payment of inspection charges to LRP

 Random inspection of farms and soil sampling for residue testing by SIs

 Ensure the farmers use the prescribed items for preparation of Organic Inputs

 Maintain proper documentation on Meetings / Trainings / Exposure Visits organized (with details on list of farmers attended with their signatures, minutes of the meeting, press coverage and photographs)26

Development Role Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
2.3 Role of Local Groups

Local Groups (LGs) are the group of farmers that adopt organic farming practices that are functional and decision making bodies under PGS- India Programme. It can be an existing group of farmers who are undertaking organic farming practices or constituted newly, to be registered under PGS – India Programme. Major roles of the LGs are as follows:

 LG to organize farmers in the group and each farmer member to sign on PGS pledge  LGs to prepare detailed farm history sheets and required documents  LGs to elect Group Leader and Peer reviewers for appraisals  To register group on PGS portal and obtain User name and password from RCs  Chalk out peer appraisal strategies and organize peer appraisals  Submit summary sheet to RCs after inspections  Print certificates issued by RCs and distribute to individual farmers.
***

Development Role Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
Certification Process by Regional Councils (RCs)

(*Issues of non compliance by LGs may lead to withdrawal of certification)
Application by Local Groups (LGs) to RCs in prescribed format Verification of relevant documents and registration of LGs by RCs RCs enter into agreement with LGs Issue online user id and password for PGS portal in case of online registrations (or)
register online in case of physical application Peer appraisals by farmers in the group Random inspection of farms and soil sampling for residue testing by Surveillance Inspectors (SIs)
SI to check the compliance of the group, records of group meeting, field days etc Submit inspection report to RCs Certificate Approval Committee to issue grant of approval for certification subject to compliance Issue of approval by RCs for certification RC to issue "Scope Certificate" to LG with PGS and RC logos Action : RCs Within 15 days of issue of approval by Certificate Approval Committee Action: Local Groups (LGs)
Action: Regional Councils (RCs)
Action: RCs Action: RCs Action: LGs Action: RCs Action: RCs Action: RCs Action: RCs PKVY - IMPLEMENTATION MONITORING PROFORMA (MONTHLY REPORT)
[For Regional Councils based on Annual Action Plan]*

(A)
Physical Progress

Monitoring Criteria Target (Annual Action Plan)
(During the month)
(Cumulative during the year)
No of Groups Registered

Total no of farmers registered in groups

Area covered (ha)

Inputs distributed on subsidy (Kg)

PSG Green PSG Organic PSG Green PSG Organic Total no of farmers certified

Products produced (Nos)

Production in MT

Revenue generated from marketing (Rs in Lakh)

(B)
Mobilization activities

Monitoring Criteria Target (Annual Action Plan)
(During the month)
(Cumulative during the year)
Number of farmer meetings organized

Number of trainings organized

Number of exposure visits organized

(C)
Financial Progress

Monitoring Criteria Allocation Expenditure during the month Cumulative Expenditure Mobilization and adoption of PGS certification (Rs in Lakhs)

Manure Management and Biological Nitrogen Harvesting (subsidy to the farmers)
(Rs in Lakhs)

Development Role Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
Abbreviations

AAP Annual Action Plan ADA Assistant Director, Agriculture ATMA Agricultural Technology Management Agency CAU Central Agricultural Universities CHC Custom Hiring Centre CSS Centrally Sponsored Scheme DAC & FW Department of Agriculture Cooperation and Farmers Welfare DDA Deputy Director, Agriculture DLEC District- Level Executive Committee FPO Farmers Producers Organisations GoI Government of India IA Implementing Agency ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research INM Integrated Nutrient Management JDA Joint Director, Agriculture KVK Krishi Vigyan Kendra LG Local Group LRP Lead Resource Person MAO Mandal Agriculture Officer NABL National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories NAC National Advisory Committee NCOF National Centre of Organic Farming NGO Non Government Organization NMSA National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture NSC National Seeds Corporation PD Project Director PGS Participatory Guarantee System PKVY Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana PROM Phosphate Rich Organic Manure RC Regional Council RCOF Regional Centre of Organic Farming SAU State Agricultural Universities SFAC Small Farmers Agri Consortium SHM Soil Health Management SI Surveillance Inspector SMAM Sub- Mission on Agricultural Mechanisation UC Utilization Certificate ZC Zonal Council ZP Zilla Parishad

Development Role Manual – Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)
Endnotes and References Guideline for Model Organic Cluster Demonstration and Model Organic Farm under Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) (April 2017). Available from http://agricoop.nic.in/sites/default/files/model%20organic%20cluster%20demonstation%20and%20model%20organic%20f arm%20guidlines%20dated%2003.04.2017.pdf

2 PGS – India Operational Manual available at http://pgsindia-ncof.gov.in/pdf_file/PGS- India%20Operational%20Manual.pdf and PGS portal can be accessed at http://pgsindia-ncof.gov.in/

3 Third Party Certification : Organic certification system is a quality assurance initiative, intended to assure quality, prevent fraud and promote commerce, based on set of standards and ethics. It is a process certification for producers of organic food and other organic plant products.

4 Revised Guideline of PKVY (December 2015). Available from http://agricoop.nic.in/sites/default/files/RevisedGuidlinePKVY_10122015.pdf

5 Administrative Approval for implementation of the ParamparagatKrishiVikasYojana (PKVY) under the National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) during 2017- 18. (April 2017). Available from http://agricoop.nic.in/sites/default/files/PKVY_administrativeapproval.pdf

6 Reference 1

7 Zonal Councils include NCOF, Ghaziabad, Regional Centres in Bangalore, Bhubaneshwar, Nagpur, Jabalpur, Panchkula and Imphal

8 Section 1.8 Pattern of Assistance of Reference 1

9 Regional Council is an agency authorized by PGS – National Advisory Council to coordinate, monitor and approve certification decisions of Local Group under PGS – India Organic Guarantee Programme.

10 Additional information on Local groups and their roles is available in Section 2.5.1 of Reference 2.

11 S. No. 2 on Manure Management and Biological Nitrogen Harvesting of Reference 1

12 Panchagavya : Panchagavya is an organic growth promoter, used in agricultural operations, prepared with cow dung, cow urine, milk, curd and ghee.

13 Beejamruth : Beejamrut is an organic product used for seed treatment , results in improved germination of seeds and thereby increased yield

14 Jeevamruth – It is an organic fertilizer, used as a foliar spray, that improves yield and quality of produce

15 Section 2 on Model Organic Farm of Reference 1 Section 1.8 of Reference 1

17 Refer section 1.8 of Reference 1

18 Section 2.1 of Reference 2

19 Format -8 (Application format for Registration of the Local Group (LG) with Regional Council) of PGS India Operational Manual (Reference -2)
Format -5 (Application form for entry into PGS Local Group) of PGS India Operational Manual (Reference -2)

21 Format -2 (Format of agreement to be executed between PGS India Regional Council and Local Group under PGS – India)
of PGS India Operational Manual (Reference 2)

22 Pledge available in Format – 7 of PGS India Operational Manual (Reference 2)

23 Format- 6 (Farmers History Sheet) of PGS India Operational Manual (Reference 2)

24 Formats 13 A to 13E and 14 of PGS India Operational Manual (Reference 2)

25 Format -16 of PGS India Operational Manual (Reference 2)

26 Formats 11 and 12 of PGS India Operational Manual (Reference 2)