Page 1 of 122

OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES OF ATMA SCHEME, 2025

CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEME ‘SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES FOR EXTENSION REFORMS’ UNDER SUB- MISSION ON AGRICULTURE EXTENSION (SMAE) of KRISHONNATI YOJNA

Directorate of Extension Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare Government of India Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi -110001

Page 2 of 122

TABLE OF CONTENTS

S.No.
Chapter Item Description Page No.
1.
I Background and Strategy 6-7 2.
II Support To State Extension Programme for Extension Reforms (ATMA) Scheme Guidelines

8-13 3.
III ATMA Set-up &Human Resource (HR)
14-23 4.
IV Cafeteria of Activities 24-35 5.
V Convergence between Agricultural Research and Extension 36-41 6.
VI Convergence of Extension activities with other schemes 42-46 7.
VII Monitoring &Evaluation 47-49 8.
VIII Budget Allocation, Release & Utilization 50-52 9.
IX Other Operational Matters 53-57 10.
Annexure-I National Priority Areas for Extension Activities 11.
Annexure-II Convergence Matrix on Joint Circular of ICAR & DA&FW 12.
Annexure-III(a)
Inter-Departmental Working Group (IDWG)
60-61 13.
Annexure-III(b) State Agricultural Management and Extension Training Institute (SAMETI)
14.
Annexure-III(c) ATMA Governing Board (GB)
63-64 15.
Annexure-III(d) ATMA Management Committee(AMC)
65-66 16.
Annexure-III(e) Block Technology Team (BTT)
17.
Annexure-III(f)
Farmers Advisory Committees (FAC) at Block, District, and State Level 68-70 18.
Annexure-IV(a) Specialist and Functionary Support Eligible under the Scheme 19.
Annexure-IV(b)
Duties/Responsibilities of the Specialists and Functionaries 72-75 20.
Annexure-IV(c)
Abstract of Number of Posts, Remuneration and Eligibility 76-80 21.
Annexure-V(a)
ATMA Cafeteria List of Activities Eligible under the Scheme ‘Support To State Extension Programmes For Extension Reforms’ and Associated Cost Ceilings/Norms 81-95 22.
Annexure-V(b)
Concept and Cost Norms of Farm School 96-98 23.
Annexure-V(c)
Illustrative List of Optimum & Realistic Targets and Likely Shortfall which may be met from RKVY- Page 3 of 122

RAFTAAR 24.
Annexure-VI Training Module on Market-led Extension for Field Functionaries 100-101 25.
Annexure-VII Training Module on Market-led Extension for Farmers 102-104 26.
Annexure-VIII Form of Utilization Certificate (UC) - For State Governments 27.
Annexure-IX Audited Statement Of Expenditure (ASoE) for the Year ……… 28.
Annexure-X Activity Mapping for Panchayati Raj Institutions 29.
Annexure- XI Farmer Oriented Activities 30.
Annexure - XII Recognition of Prior Learning(RPL)
109-123

Page 4 of 122

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS Abbreviation Expansion ACABC Agri-Clinics & Agri-Business Centers AEM Agricultural Extension Management AES Agro-Ecological Situation AGRISNET Agriculture Resources Improvement System Network APC Agriculture Production Commissioner ATMA Agricultural Technology Management Agency BAP Block Action Plan BDO Block Development Officer BFAC Block Farmers Advisory Committee BTM Block Technology Manager BTT Block Technology Team C-DAP Comprehensive District Agriculture Plan CIGs Commodity Interest Groups CRS Community Radio Station CSC Common Service Centre DA&FW Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare DAAP District Agriculture Action Plan DFAC District Farmers Advisory Committee DoE Directorate of Extension Dy. PD Deputy Project Director DFI Doubling of Farmers Income EEIs Extension Education Institutes EMS Electronic Monitoring System EV Exposure Visit FACs Farmers Advisory Committees FF Farmer Friend FFS Farmers Field School FIAC Farm Information & Advisory Centre FIGs Farmers Interest Groups FLD Front Line Demonstration FOs Farmers Organizations FS Farm School GB Governing Board ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research ICT Information & Communication Technology IDWG Inter Departmental Working Group IPM Integrated Pest Management ITD Innovations in Technology Dissemination KCC Kisan Call Centre KVK KrishiVigyan Kendra M&E Monitoring & Evaluation MANAGE National Institute of Agricultural Extension Management MC Management Committee MOU Memorandum of Understanding

Page 5 of 122

NATP National Agricultural Technology Project NCF National Commission on Farmers NDC National Development Council NeGP National e-Governance Plan NFSM National Food Security Mission NGOs Non-Governmental Organizations NPF National Policy for Farmers NPMSF National Project on Soil Health & Fertility Management NRM Natural Resource Management PD Project Director PGDAEM Post Graduate Diploma in Agricultural Extension Management POL Petrol Oil & Lubricants PRA Participatory Rural Appraisal PRIs Panchayati Raj Institutions PS Principal Secretary R-E-F Research-Extension-Farmer linkage PM-RKVY Pradham Mantri -Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana SAMETI State Agricultural Management and Extension Training Institute SAU State Agricultural University SEWP State Extension Work Plan SHG Self Help Group SFAC State Farmers Advisory Committee SLSC State Level Sanctioning Committee SMS Subject Matter Specialist SNO State Nodal Officer SREP Strategic Research & Extension Plan VAP Village Action Plan ZRS Zonal Research Station RPL Recognize Prior Learning KY Krishonnati Yojana ATM Assistant Technology Manager

Page 6 of 122

I. Background & Strategy

Page 7 of 122

Sub-Mission on Agricultural Extension (SMAE)
1. Background and Strategy:
1.1 SMAE: Erstwhile ‘Sub-Mission on Agricultural Extension (SMAE)’ was being implemented under ‘National Mission on Agricultural Extension & Technology (NMAET)’ w.e.f. 2014-15 which has been subsumed as a sub-scheme of Umbrella Scheme ’Krishonnati Yojana’ from the financial year 2017-18.
Restructuring and strengthening of agricultural extension machinery has to be a judicious mix of extensive physical outreach of personnel, enhancement in quality through domain experts & regular capacity building, interactive methods of information dissemination, pervasive & innovative use of Information & Communication Technology (ICT) / Mass Media, Federation of groups and convergence of extension related efforts under various schemes and programmes of Government of India and the State Governments. The objective of this Sub-Mission is to appropriately strengthen, expand and up-scale existing Extension Schemes. The on-going Extension Schemes include the ‘Central Sector’ and ‘Centrally Sponsored Schemes’ being implemented by the ‘Extension Division/Directorate of Extension’. Even in the case of Central Sector Schemes which are proposed to be subsumed within the Sub- Mission, a greater role has been envisaged for the States through their active involvement in planning, implementation and monitoring. The continuation of SMAE beyond 12th Plan period includes the following components:- A.
Centrally Sponsored Scheme Support to State Extension Programme for Extension Reforms(ATMA) Scheme.
B.
Central Sector Schemes (i).
Agri-Clinics & Agri-Business Centre (AC&ABC); (ii) Kisan Call Centre (KCC); (iii) Mass Media Scheme in Agricultural Extension (MMSAE) including strengthening of Digital Agriculture Extension Framework; (iv) Diploma in Agricultural Extension Services for Input Dealers (DAESI); (v) Extension Education Institutes (EEIs); (vi) National Institute of Agricultural Extension Management (MANAGE) merging NIAM; & (vii) Exhibition/Fairs.

Page 8 of 122

II. SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMME FOR EXTENSION REFORMS (ATMA SCHEME GUIDELINES)

Page 9 of 122

2.
Support to State Extension Programme for Extension

Reforms (ATMA Scheme Guidelines)

2.1 INTRODUCTION: The extension system is an important pillar in agricultural development, to empower farmers with relevant information, technology, skills and support, all of which are necessary to enhance sustainability, farmers’ income and agriculture as an enterprise. Agriculture provides ample opportunities for the farmers to undertake several income generating agri-enterprises which are on-farm, off-farm and non-farm in nature.
Agri-enterprises include nursery, seed production, custom hiring, vermi- composting, bee-keeping, managing common storage, processing units, agri- tourism, milk chilling unit, mushroom cultivation etc. require skills, investment and market linkages. Income addition to farmers through these activities contributes significantly for doubling income not only for the enterprising farmer but also for others who use these quality inputs and services.

Extension also needs to focus on these areas so as to create the Small-Medium Enterprises (SMEs) at Village level. Thus, extension services require re-aligning themselves with Crop Diversification, Integrated Farming System, Climate Resilient Agriculture, Natural Farming, Market-Led Extension, Risk Management, in both production and marketing for sustainable crop production.
In order to increase outreach of extension services to large number of farmers and addressing their four common concepts, viz. what to grow?, how to finance?, what input to use? and where & how to sell?, an urgent need was felt to further upscale the existing extension initiatives and revamp the main public extension scheme, i.e. Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA).
Need for reforms in Agricultural Extension have been explicitly raised in the report of the Committee on “Doubling of Farmers’ Income” (DFI) by 2022.
Keeping the recommendations of the DFI report and policy initiatives in view and to strengthen and make ATMA scheme more vibrant, a futuristic vision has been developed to empower the farmers.

2.2 VISION To empower farmers with information, technology, skill, risk and farm management practices across agriculture sub-sectors and commodity specific agriculture value chains, so as to enable them to realize higher net income from their enterprises on a sustainable basis.

Page 10 of 122

2.3 AIMS AND OBJECTIVES a. The Scheme ‘Support to State Extension Programme for Extension Reforms’ popularly known as ATMA scheme, aimed at promoting decentralized, farmer friendly extension system in the country with an objective to support State Government’s efforts to revamp the agricultural extension system focusing on Natural Farming, Climate Resilient Agriculture, Crop Diversification, National Pest Surveillance System, Soil Health Card, Digital Agriculture Mission and making available the latest agricultural technologies and good agricultural practices to the farmers.
b. Keeping in view the changed focus of ATMA scheme, the objectives of the scheme have been revised as under :- i) More emphases of extension services on post-production management, surplus management and marketing.
ii) To converge extension activities of various Divisions of DA&FW in ATMA Cafeteria.
iii) Convergence between research and extension.
iv) Extension outreach to farmers through Video Conferencing.
v) Skill Development Training of Rural Youth (minimum 200 hours).
vi) To promote climate resilient agriculture, according to requirement of various agro-climatic zone.
vii) Adopting group approach to extension in line with the identified needs and requirements of the farmers in the form of CIGs/FIGs/FSGs and consolidate them as FPOs.
viii) Addressing gender concerns by mobilizing women farmers into groups for their capacity building ix) Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) based farmers training.

2.4 CHANGES IN THE EXISTING ATMA SCHEME In order to accomplish the vision, guiding elements of DFI report and key objectives/reforms, the following changes have been made in the Scheme:- 2.4.1 Production to Market Orientation:
Focus of extension services will be given on marketing aspects along with a quality production. Farmers training shall be organized on the themes of Post-Harvest Management, Surplus Management, Agriculture Marketing, various initiatives of Government, etc. For ensuring implementation of activities with changed focus towards marketing, States may take up the following steps:- i. All extension personnel (ATMA & Non-ATMA) are targeted to be trained in market led extension training programmes. The training modules on market led extension for field functionaries and farmers have been developed which may be seen in Annexure-VI & Annexure-VII respectively.

Page 11 of 122

ii. Farmers training programmes (within District) under the scheme henceforth shall be two days duration. Training module shall include RPL based farmers training followed by their up-skilling. A certificate of progressive farmers will be provided to them on successful completion of the training programme.
Such farmers’ trainings shall be organized at the level of Gram Panchayats.
In special cases, States may also organize such trainings at Block level at a larger scale. The certified progressive farmers are expected to disseminate acquired knowledge and skill among their fellow farmers. The concept of RPL may be seen at Annexure-XII.

2.5. Converge Extension Activities of various Divisions of Department of

Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare (DA&FW) in ATMA Cafeteria:
Extension activities of various Divisions of DA&FW have been identified and made these eligible to converge in ATMA cafeteria. These identified thematic areas include Post-Harvest Management, Surplus Management, Marketing, Diversification, Integrated Farming System, Seed Production& Seed Technology, Integrated Development of Horticulture, Soil Health Management, Integrated Pest Management, Agricultural Mechanization, Micro Irrigation, etc. Duration and cost norms along with certification may be as per specified guidelines of respective schemes of various Divisions of DA&FW.

2.6 Convergence of Extension with Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying:
Services of Krishi Sakhis & Pashu Sakhis nurtured by DAY-NRLM may be suitably used for creating awareness among the farmers under ATMA Scheme after providing them training in relevant subjects.

2.7 Convergence between Research and Extension:
In order to implement convergence circular jointly signed by the DG, ICAR & the Secretary (AC&FW) in letter and spirit, a convergence matrix has been prepared for reporting/monitoring with quantifiable targets as per details given below :- a. Monthly Interface Meeting b. Pre-seasonal Technical Updation c. Farmer-Scientist Interactions at District level d. Designating Experts at District level for instant technical help of ATM/BTM e. Joint Visits in identified villages by ATMA and KVK f. Reporting and Monitoring mechanism.
States may ensure regular implementation and reporting of progress on convergence between research and extension on the above matrix. The detailed guidelines regarding convergence may be seen in the Chapter No. IV.

Page 12 of 122

2.8 Extension through Interaction:
In order to provide greater opportunities of interaction between farmers and experts on regular basis, a mechanism of Video Conferencing for interaction between experts and farmers shall be made as an eligible activity under ATMA cafeteria.

2.09 Skill Development Training of Rural Youth (Minimum 200 hours):
In order to enhance self-employment opportunities and entrepreneurship development in agriculture and allied sectors, ‘Skill Training for Rural Youth’ component is being included in ATMA. This component was earlier implemented from RKVY funding and skill trainings were conducted through Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs). As per revised Guidelines, the District ATMA to implement this component in consultation with respective KVK.

2.10 Promotion of Innovative ATMA set-up based on Agro-Ecological Zones:
In order to improve mechanism of agricultural extension system in the country, States may consider various innovative and flexible ideas like organising ATMA activities agro-ecological zones in a district. States may consider such innovative ideas based on the agro-ecological zones in each district prescribing farmers to adopt appropriate technologies and cropping patterns. Manpower support under the scheme, however, shall not exceed the maximum permissible limit, based on the number of administrative districts in State.

III. ATMA Set-up & Human Resource (HR)
3.1 ATMA set-up at different levels is given below:-

3.1.1 State Level

(i) The State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) set up under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) is the apex body to approve State Extension Work Plan (SEWP) which will form a part of the State Agriculture Plan (SAP). In those cases where SLSC meeting cannot be held in time or there is any other administrative reason, SEWP can be approved by the Executive Committee of SMAE on the recommendation of Inter Departmental Working Group (IDWG).

(ii) The SLSC may be supported by the IDWG which is responsible for day-to-day coordination and management of the Scheme activities within the State.

Page 13 of 122

(iii) The State Nodal Cell (SNC), consisting of State Nodal officer, State Coordinator, Gender Coordinator and supporting staff (Computer Programmer & Accountant- cum-Clerk) will ensure timely receipt of District Agriculture Action Plans (DAAPs), formulation of State Extension Work Plan (SEWP) duly incorporating farmers’ feedback obtained through State Farmer Advisory Committee (SFAC)
and its approval by the SLSC. The SNC will then convey the approval and monitor implementation of these work plans by State Agricultural Management & Extension Training Institutes (SAMETIs) and ATMAs. The SAMETIs will draw- up and execute an Annual Training Calendar for capacity building of the Extension Functionaries in the State. While doing so, the SAMETI will check duplication and overlapping of training content, training schedule, and trainees themselves. The SAMETIs table to ensure effective coordination with MANAGE, Hyderabad for finalizing the Annual Training Calendar through their participation and indepth discussion in the National annual Training Planning Workshop at MANAGE involving all the stakeholders.

3.1.2 District Level

ATMA is an autonomous institution set up at district level to ensure delivery of extension services to farmers. ATMA Governing Board is the apex body of ATMA which provides overall policy direction. ATMA Management Committee is the executive body looking after implementation of the scheme. District Farmers Advisory Committee is a body to provide farmers’ feedback for district level planning and implementation. With dedicated staff provided for the ATMA, it will continue to be the district level nodal agency responsible for overall management of agriculture extension system within the district, including preparation of Strategic Research and Extension Plan (SREP). The process flow for formulating Action Plans has been described in Para 3.2 below.

3.1.3 Block Level The Block ATMA Cell consisting of Block Technology Team (BTT) (a team comprising officers of agriculture and other allied departments within the block) and Block Farmers’ Advisory Committee (BFAC) (a group exclusively consisting of selected farmers of the block) will prepare the Block Action Plan (BAP) and provide necessary extension support within the Block in its execution.

3.1.4. Village Level (i)
The Farmer Friend (FF) will serve as a vital link between extension system and farmers at village level (one for every two villages).
(ii) Agri-entrepreneurs, Diploma holders in Agricultural Extension Services for Input Dealers (DAESI), Input Dealers and extension workers in non-

Page 14 of 122

governmental sector will supplement the efforts of extension functionaries in public extension system.
(iii)Commodity Interest Groups (CIGs), Farmer Interest Groups (FIGs) and Food Security Groups (FSGs) will serve as a nodal point for information & technology dissemination among its members and federating in Farmers Producers Organizations (FPOs) to ensure group approach.
(iv) Farm Schools will serve as a mechanism for farmer-to-farmer extension at every Block.

3.1.5. The organizational structure at various levels has been depicted in the following diagram:

3.1.6. The following Committees shall be set up at various levels.
 State Level:
(i) Inter-Departmental Working Group (IDWG)

(ii) SAMETI Executive Committee

(iii) State Farmers Advisory Committee (SFAC)
 District Level: (i) ATMA Governing Board

(ii) ATMA Management Committee

(iii)District Farmers Advisory Committee (DFAC)
 Block Level:
(i) Block Technology Team (BTT)

(ii)Block Farmers Advisory Committee (BFAC)

State Nodal Cell CIGs, FIGs, FSGs, FARMERS, FPOs State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC)/ IDWG SAMETI & SAU/ICAR Institutes DAC&FW W O R K P L A N District Training Centre, KVK & ZRS Block Technology Team Agri-Entrepreneurs Farm Schools Block Farmers Advisory Committee District Farmers’ Advisory Committee State Farmers Advisory Committee ATMA (GB & MC)
Block ATMA cell Farmer Friend F U N D F L O W MANAGE/EEIs/ SAUs/ICAR (HRD/ACABC/ DAESI)/ EXHIBITIONS STATES

Page 15 of 122

The composition, functions and mandate of these Committees have been given at Annexure III (a) to III (f).

3.2. Process Flow for Action Plans SREP is a comprehensive document identifying research/extension priorities of the district, keeping in mind agro-ecological situations and existing gaps in technology generation & dissemination in all agriculture and allied sector areas/activities including Horticulture, Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries. All extension related activities under other schemes of DA&FW would naturally form part of SREP. SREPs will be prepared in coordination with the line departments, NGOs, Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), Private Sector, farmers and other stakeholders at the district level.
Similar training & field extension related components in other programmes of DA&FW and State Governments will also be implemented through ATMA.
Funds earmarked for such activities under different Schemes/ Programmes will be utilized through ATMA. Similarly, ATMA funds also will be suitably used to cover training & field extension objectives/activities of other Schemes/ Programmes. Such convergence arrived at through SREP/ SEWP will avoid duplication and ensure wider coverage in terms of outreach to farmers and gamut of activities.

Various Action Plans shall emanate from SREP as follows:

(i) These SREPs are Five-year vision documents which shall be revisited after every 5 years to accommodate newly identified gaps and emerging areas of importance viz. market plan based on cross-sector value chain approach, skill development, agri start-ups and off-farm income generating options.
(ii) SREPs will form the basis for formulation of Block Action Plans (BAPs) on an annual basis. Block Action Plans are then consolidated at the District level to prepare the District Agriculture Action Plans (DAAPs).
(iii) The DAAPs will be consolidated in the form of State Extension Work Plan (SEWP) which then forms a part of consolidated Annual Action Plan (AAP)
under KY.
3.3. ATMA Human Resource provided at different levels is given below:
For ensuring effective implementation of the scheme at the grass root level and addressing the need of the farmers, provision of a robust and dedicated specialist and extension functionaries has been made in the scheme. The details of manpower support provided are given below:-

Page 16 of 122

a) Over 28,000 posts of extension functionaries have been provided under the scheme at the state, district and block level.
b) Remuneration of those field functionaries has been enhanced, whose rremuneration was not revised since 2014-15 onwards. This may certainly motivate ATMA functionaries and accelerate implementation of the Scheme activities on the ground.
c) Average 3 Assistant Technology Managers (ATMs) and 1 Block Technology Manager (BTM) are envisaged per block under this scheme.
Detailed justification for deciding number of ATMs in a Block may be seen in para 3.3.3(ii).
d) Extension related manpower is proposed at three levels viz. State, District and Block level. Specialist and functionary support eligible under the scheme is given at Annexure IV(a).
e) Roles and responsibilities of extension related manpower provided under this Scheme is given in Annexure-IV(b) and abstract of number of posts, eligibility and qualification, remuneration (enhanced considerably in case of contractual or outsource basis functionaries), etc. at Annexure- IV(c).
f) Hierarchical structure of officials under SMAE (including ATMA) is as follows:
3.3.1 State Level a. State Nodal Cell : the State Nodal Cell (SNC) will consist of State Nodal Officer, State Coordinator, Gender Coordinator and supporting staff. Under supporting staff at SNC level,One Computer Programmer/Computer Operator and One Accountant-cum-Clerk is also being provided . In order to carry out State level activities, as specified in ATMA Cafeteria, and to ensure convergence with various departments at State level and to assist the State Nodal Officer (i.e.
Director/Commissioner of Agriculture)
in overall management of agricultural extension system within the State, two Coordinators (one-State Coordinator & one-Gender Coordinator) have been approved for each State/Union Territory. The State Nodal Officer (SNO) shall be designated by the State Government, which will also provide requisite Ministerial support. The State Coordinator & Gender Coordinator are to be engaged on contractual / outsource basis under this Scheme. The functions of State Coordinator and Gender Coordinator are given in Annexure-IV (b). The Gender Coordinator will perform the functions as per the Annexure-IV (b) to safeguard the interest of women farmers. The Gender Coordinator will share all gender related findings and strategies with the State Coordinator and function under the overall supervision of State Coordinator, and the State Coordinator under the overall supervision of State Nodal Officer. SAMETI: In order to ensure regular training and skill upgradation of State and

Page 17 of 122

District/Block level extension functionaries and for reaching out to the grass root level extension functionaries and farmers through field visits, the following manpower is provided for SAMETI in each State. Director, SAMETI shall work under the overall guidance of the State Nodal Officer identified under ATMA scheme. However, in cases where the State Nodal Officer is not an officer of equivalent or higher rank than Director, SAMETI, may work under the overall guidance of the officer under whom State Nodal Officer is placed. The Faculty Members (Deputy Directors) of SAMETI shall report to Director SAMETI. The duties of Director SAMETI/Faculty are given in Annexure-IV (b).
b. The overall staff position at State level is given below:

Posts No.
of Blocks State HQ.
SAMETI Total Staff State Coordinator + Gender Coordinator+ Accountant+ Computer Programmer Director Dy.
Director Accountant- cum- Establish- ment- Clerk Computer Programmer/ Operator < 100 1 + 1+1+1 4 1 100 – 1 + 1+1+1 8 1 > 400 1 + 1+1+1 12 1 3.3.2 District Level:
(i) Each ATMA Unit consisting of the following core staff of five persons, under the overall supervision of PD, ATMA, will be responsible for management of agricultural extension services within the District including holding of regular meetings of ATMA Management Committee (MC) and ATMA Governing Board (GB):
a) Project Director b) Deputy Project Directors c) Accountant-cum-Establishment-Clerk d) Computer Programmer/ Operator (ii) The Project Director ATMA shall report to the Chairman, ATMA GB and also function as Chairman of ATMA Management Committee. The two Deputy PDs would work under the administrative control of PD, ATMA. The duties & responsibilities of PD & Deputy PD Accountant-cum-Clerk and Computer Programmer/Operator are given at Annexure-IV (b).

3.3.3 Block Level:
(i) One Block Technology Manager (BTM) is provided in each Block to co- ordinate the ATMA related activities of the BTT and BFAC. BTM will work

Page 18 of 122

under the overall supervision of the BTT Convener for all ATMA related activities at the Block level.
(ii) On an average three Assistant Technology Managers (ATMs) are to be placed in each Block (2 to 4 depending on size of the Block) exclusively for delivery of extension services in agriculture and allied sectors as per priority areas for various Blocks. Out of 3 ATM, at least one ATM should be Women.
(a) In N.E. States and other hilly States viz. H.P., J&K, and Uttarakhand, the number of ATMs deployed per block should be based on the criteria i.e. Blocks having upto 5000 farm households and the area of the Block being upto 800 sq. kms, 2 ATMs would be deployed.
However, if the area of the Block is more than 800 sq.km, 3 ATMs could be considered;
(b) In all other States Blocks having upto 12000 farm households and the area of the Block being upto 1000 sq. km, 2 ATMs would be deployed.
However, if the number of farm households/Block exceeds 20000 and the area of the block is more than 1000 sq.km, the deployment of ATM can go up to 4. All other Blocks will have 3 ATMs. However, average figure of more than 3 ATMs per state will need to be concurred by the Government of India, so that overall country average does not exceed 3.
(c) The areas of expertise (i.e. Agriculture, Horticulture, Animal Husbandry, Dairying, Fisheries etc.) of these ATMs will be decided based on priorities for various Blocks. These ATMs shall be provided requisite connectivity and mobility to perform the assigned functions.
The duties of BTMs and ATMs are given at Annexure IV (b).
(d) Block level and District level manpower available under various schemes will be pooled for regular coverage of groups of Villages/Panchayats for extension related expertise. However, domain expertise of various extension personnel in a Block/District will be suitably used to ensure all-round outreach to farmers.

3.4 Mode of Recruitment and Remuneration:

3.4.1 The BTMs and ATMs at Block Level may be engaged by Project Director (PD), ATMA on contractual /outsource basis through a mechanism identified by the State.
BTMs and ATMs should be preferably below 45 years of age (upper age limit of 45 years would, however, not be applicable on those candidates who have already served as BTM/ ATM as they have gained working experience under the scheme), as their work involves extensive travel execution of field activities. While, the ATMs will remain

Page 19 of 122

under the administrative control of BTM, the BTM will work under administrative control of PD, ATMA.
3.4.2 The posts of State Coordinator, Gender Coordinator, BTM & ATM at Block level and Computer Programmer/Computer Operator (at State & District Level) may be filled on contractual /outsource basis with lump-sum remuneration.
3.4.3 Following emoluments are suggested to be paid to the contractual / outsourced manpower:
1. State Coordinator:

Rs 60,000/- 2. Gender Coordinator:

Rs.50,000/- 3. BTM:

Rs.30,000/- 4. ATM

Rs 25,000/- 5. Computer Programmer

Rs 25,000/-

3.4.4 All other posts (Director SAMETI, Deputy Director SAMETI, PD ATMA, DPD ATMA and Accountant cum Clerk) may be filled by deputation / secondment / appointment for the scheme period or such other mode as the State Government may deem appropriate. State government may take necessary measures to fill up these posts / vacancies by deputation/secondment/appointment only. Henceforth, regular posts may not be filled on contractual/outsource basis. However, States(UTs may retain their existing deployed manpower filled on contract basis viz. Accountant-cum- clerk, Dy. Project Director (ATMA), Dy. Director SAMETI revising their remuneration to Rs. 30,000/ , Rs. 52,000/- and Rs. 55,000/- per month respectively w.e.f. 01.04.2025 till the time these vacancies are filled on regular basis.

3.4.5 Following norms regarding contractual/outsourced manpower may be followed:
(i)
Concerned contractual/outsourced/regular persons may be given the stipulated emoluments through digital/online mode of payment.
(ii)
The contractual/outsourced manpower shall also be eligible for getting benefits of EPF, ESIC as admissible from time to time as per prevalent laws & instructions and/or options exercised by the stakeholders concerned. GST, statutory dues, bonus if applicable, as per relevant statutory norms, and contractor’s margins are to be indicated separately under the expenses shown for manpower component. While renewing the contract, the State Government may give preference to the existing/experienced contractual / outsourced manpower and do not terminate their services without assigning any reason. States may consider contractual /outsourced manpower deployment co-terminus with the scheme. Satisfaction of the Agriculture Department of the State at an appropriate level may be the determining factor regarding continuation of persons after initial period of deployment.

Page 20 of 122

(iii) Annual increase in the remuneration of contractual/outsourced ATMA manpower : Rate for annual increase can be upto 5% for those contractual/outsourced manpower who have already crossed the revised initial ceiling and upto 10% for those contractual/outsourced manpower who have not yet crossed the revised initial ceiling. For example : in case a Computer Programmer (CP) deployed in 2014 with the existing monthly remuneration @ Rs.16,000/- (fixed in 2014) is presently getting gross monthly emoluments more than revised initial ceiling of Rs.25,000/-, he / she will be eligible for getting an annual increase @ upto 5% (flat and not compounding) while a CP who is presently getting only say Rs.18,000/- per month ( i.e. less than the revised initial ceiling ) will be eligible for getting an annual increase @ upto 10% (flat and not compounding), till he/she reaches up to the revised initial ceiling.

Note:
a) Higher amounts to existing contractual/outsourced manpower are payable only after performance review and screening on the lines described above.
While fixing total emoluments to contractual/outsourced manpower of any post at enhanced rate, emoluments should not be less than total emoluments last paid to contractual/outsourced manpower.
b) The amounts listed above are upper ceilings ‘for initial fixation of emolument’ and the State Governments may consider fixing the emoluments accordingly.
(iv) If, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the candidates for various posts with prescribed qualifications as given at Annexure-IV(c) are not available, the qualifications may be relaxed by the IDWG subject to ratification by the SLSC under intimation to the Government of India.
(v)
Leave/maternity leave etc. to contractual/outsourced ATMA manpower may be considered by the States/UTs at par with similarly placed contractual / outsourced manpower in other organizations in the State/UT concerned.

3.4.6 Support for Innovative Activity at Village Level (Farmer Friend)
(i) It is necessary to identify and groom progressive farmers (including women farmers) with requisite qualification (Senior Secondary/High School) & experience as Farmer Friend (FF), one per two census villages. In case of non-availability of progressive farmers with requisite qualifications, at some places, a progressive farmer, with

Page 21 of 122

required oral and written communication skills, may be considered.
Only experienced and achiever farmers (say, with an age of more than 40 years or so, as the State Government may deem appropriate) are to be designated as Farmer Friends. Preference may be given to awardee/progressive farmers while identifying farmer friend. Farmer Friend will lead by example and is expected to have up-graded skills and would be available in the village to advice on agriculture and allied activities. Since FFs provide a vital link between public extension system and farmers at village level, it is essential to select experienced, progressive and practicing farmers who are not looking forward to this task as an alternative means of livelihood. The Farmer Friend will be identified by BTM on a resolution of Gram Panchayat (GP), which will, in turn, consult CIGs/FIGs working in the Panchayat area.
(ii) Farmer Friends will be provided with special opportunity for upgradation of skills through trainings, study tours and visits to SAUs/other institutes, by utilizing support available under ATMA. Rs.18,000/- per Farmer Friend per year will be shared between the Centre and the State as per pattern of assistance approved for all other activities under the scheme to meet contingency expenditure which FF incurs towards discharge of his duties, including incidental expenses incurred on acquisition of knowledge. It should not be perceived as remuneration. It is to clarify that identification of Farmer friends should not be seen as an employment opportunity in the State Government and this was never envisaged under the scheme.

IV. CAFETERIA OF ACTIVITIES

ATMA CAFETERIA OF ACTIVITIES:
In order to implement extension activities with special focus on post-harvest management, marketing, etc. as recommended by the Committee on “Doubling of Farmers’ Income (DFI) by 2022, various extension activities are to be carried out at different levels addressing national priority areas (Annexure-I) suitably contributing in the national goal of doubling of farmers’ income. Extension services are being re-aligned with sustainability aspects of farming, for crop diversification, integrated farming system, climate resilient agriculture, risk management, Natural Farming in both production and marketing.
Additional/innovative extension activities have included to be implemented under ATMA scheme, viz.
extension through interaction etc., at Panchayat/Village level for providing door-step services and dissemination of information on Government schemes to farmers.

Page 22 of 122

Unit cost and Activity ceiling limit norms of various Cafeteria activities under ATMA have been revised and indicated at Annexure-V (a). The Cafeteria provides support for State, District and Block level activities. Apart from the national priority areas/thematic areas, States may also choose local area/theme in keeping with location specific needs of farmers for their capacity building as identified in Strategic Research and Extension Plan (SREP) of the District. The details of activities at different levels are given below:-

4.1 State Level (A):
A.1 Monitoring and Evaluation:
This activity includes three review workshops and R-E-F Linkage before each crop season (Rabi, Kharif and Zaid) on annual basis @ 1.00 lakh per workshop, concurrent monitoring & evaluation and expenses on IDWG meetings and other contingencies including opex for SNC, SC, GC including expenditure on convening meeting of SFAC.

A.2 Training Courses:
This item includes training programmes for National/Inter- State/Within State (SAMETI Level) for both Government and Non- Government extension functionaries (A.2.a), Induction Training of ATMA field functionaries (A.2.b), Refresher training of all ATMA field functionaries (A.2.c), Workshop for development of Quality Resource material (A.2.d).One DPD out of two at District level and one ATM out of three at Block level are to be essentially trained in marketing in order to acquaint them with market expertise.
A.3 Exposure Visit of Extension functionaries:
In order to enhance capacity building and expertise of extension functionaries, a provision of their exposure visit and PRI members to progressive States have been made in the guidelines.
A.4 Organization of State level Exhibitions/Kisan Mela:

As per cafeteria details A.5 Participation in Krishi Expo and Regional Fairs organised/supported by DA&FW: As per cafeteria details A.6 Award for Best performing ATMA: As per cafeteria details A.7 Farmer Awards: As per cafeteria details A.8 Operational Expenses at SAMETI Level: As per cafeteria details

Page 23 of 122

4.2 District / Block Level Activities (B):
Capacity building of farmers through different extension activities at District level are now to be organized shifting focus from production oriented to post-harvest management, marketing and plant protection approaches like IPM, Farmer Oriented Activities–It includes development of SREP, farmers training, demonstrations, exposure visits of farmers, mobilization of farmer groups, women food security groups, rewards and incentives to farmers groups, and farmer awards.

B.1 Development of SREP:
Strategic Research Extension Plan (SREP) is essential for formulating State Extension Work Plan (SEWP) and annual action Plan(AAP). This document is prepared adopting integrated farming system approach, where extension and research gaps of all the sub-systems are identified through participatory methods. SREP is re-visited after every five years to accommodate newly identified gaps and emerging areas. The committee on DFI has since recommended paradigm shift from production to market-led-extension, States may include new areas in revised SREP like market-led-extension,mitigate crop loses, Skill Development, agri-start- ups and income generating livelihood options.

B.2 Farmers Training:
Farmers Training is an important component of capacity building of farmers in latest agriculture technologies and adoption of Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs). Farmers Training would focus on thrust areas like Natural Farming, Climate Resilient Agriculture, Crop Diversification, National Pest Surveillance System, Soil Health Card, Digital Agriculture Mission etc. In order to maintain quality of farmers training, farmers training shall be conducted in the specialized subject matter institutions viz:
ICAR Institutes/ State Agriculture Universities/State Agricultural Management & Training Institutes/ MANAGE/ EEIs and KVKs etc. [Annexure-V(a)].
i.
Under Inter-State and within State training of farmers activity, cost norms are inclusive of : (i) Travel cost by bus or second class sleeper (actual cost); (ii) Refreshments/Meals and Stay during training, (iii) Expenditure on training, training material; (iv) Training kit and agricultural inputs, if any; (v) Cost of honorarium and/or travel of the trainer (actual); (vi)
Miscellaneous food cost during travel, if any, and(vii) Field visits etc.
ii.
The amounts indicated in the cafeteria are top activity ceilings and only the actual cost should be paid after exercising economy. The Progress Reports should contain only these actual amounts. Any deviation from

Page 24 of 122

these cost norms of training under items B.2 (a) to (c) should be got approved by the IDWG which includes State’s Finance Secretary.
In case of within district farmers training, likely expenditure or State/location specific cost norms needs to be got approved in advance by the ATMA Governing Board.
iii.
Duration of the farmers training for inter-state, intra-State shall be 7days & 5 days respectively, excluding journey time. Farmers training programmes (within District) under the scheme would be 2 days duration and these shall be organized at the level of Gram Panchayats. In special cases, States may also organize such trainings at Block level at a larger scale.
iv.
Beneficiary farmers should be selected in a transparent manner such that all panchayats in a block are covered on rotation basis. Repetition of farmers is not permissible, except when theme of training is different.
Other guidelines regarding selection of beneficiaries may be referred in Chapter-VII.
v.
States shall develop module for these farmers training in consultation with domain experts. Training module shall include recognizing the Prior learning of farmers followed by their up-skilling by way of training. A certificate of progressive farmers will be provided to them on successful completion of the training programme. The certified progressive farmers are expected to disseminate acquired knowledge and skill among their fellow farmers.
Farmer Trainings may be organized by ATMA through respective domain experts of ICAR/KVKs, SAUs, National/State level Institutes, Government agencies and specialized Institutes etc.
vi.
The identified thematic areas of farmers training include:
National Priority Areas/Themes:- (i)
Post-harvest management (ii)
Organic production clusters (iii)
Market led extension (iv)
Seed production and seed technology aspects (v)
Integrated farming, climate resilient cropping system, adaptation and good agricultural practices.
(vi)
Integrated pest management practices in major crops (vii)
Holistic growth of Horticulture sector covering fruits, vegetables, root and tuber crops, mushrooms, spices, flowers, aromatic plants, coconut, cocoa and bamboo.
(viii) Judicious use of chemical fertilizers based on the recommendations of Soil Health Card (ix)
Promotion of oilseeds cultivation

Page 25 of 122

(x)
Promotion of less water consuming nutri-cereal crops (xi)
Registration of farmers on custom hiring Centre app (xii)
Coarse cereals and coarse cereal based cropping systems for maize and barley (xiii) Federating FIGs/CIGs/FSGs as FPOs (xiv) Agricultural Mechanization (xv)
Integrated Farming System in Rain-fed Areas (xvi) Honey bee (xvii) Kitchen Gardening (xviii) Extension trainings for Export clusters of APEDA (xix) Natural Farming (xx)
Climate Resilient Agriculture (xxi) Any other allied activity like Animal husbandry, dairy, fishery, poultry, etc.
State Priority Areas - Based on the technological gaps arisen out of SREPs, States may also decide areas of training, exposure visits, demonstrations and farm schools as per their priority.

B.3 Demonstrations:
i.
Demonstration with an embedded philosophy of ‘seeing is believing’ is an important extension activity to teach new knowledge and skills to farmers.
Demonstration shall be organized in those areas which have not been covered under other Schemes / Missions / Sub-Missions of the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare. ‘Notified varieties for climate resilient agriculture and bio-fortified varieties’ of different crops would be promoted through these extension activities. Appropriate publicity should be accorded to the Demonstration and Farm Schools so that benefits can reach to the large number of farmers. A provision of Rs.6,000/- per acre is made under the scheme for one demo (Photographs of the event will be uploaded on Krishi Mapper). This provision shall be used for soil testing , seeds of improved variety of crops, fertilizer, IPM, display board etc. Selected farmer may also organize a controlled plot demonstration of 1 acre at his own cost, so that a comparison can be drawn. Soil Testing /Soil Health Card is mandatory for conducting Demonstration.
ii.
Demonstration shall be organized in a plot of 1 acre land, at place easily approachable/accessible to other farmers. There should be a prominent display board at the selected plot indicating the details of demonstration activity.
iii.
Beneficiary farmers should be selected in a transparent manner such that all panchayats in a block are covered on rotation basis. Repetition of

Page 26 of 122

farmers is not permissible, except when crop of demonstration is different.
Other guidelines regarding selection of beneficiaries may be referred in Chapter-IX.
iv.
For wider dissemination and increased outreach, State is expected to suitably popularize the demonstration activity among the targeted farmers.
State may use various modes of publicity for reaching large number of farmers.

B.4 Exposure Visits of Farmers:
The exposure visits of farmers to exemplary farms either inter-state, within state and within district are considered as the best form of learning from new farming practices and modern, scientific and innovative farm technologies. Exposure visits of farmers will be conducted in national / international/ regional/ state and district level Agri-Fairs wherein advanced agriculture technologies are show-cased for creating awareness among large number of farmers.Travel and staying together with fellow farmers affords more time and is a good opportunity to share each other’s experiences and establish rapport, which can result in actual adoption.
The cost norms for inter-state, within state and within district exposure visits for farmers of General/NER States per manday are indicated in cafeteria table.
B.5 Mobilization of Farmer Interest Groups (FIGs):
Group approach is central to the restructured extension mechanism to make extension more demand-driven. ATMA is envisaged as a very effective instrument for promoting participatory planning and group based approaches with focus on learning and empowerment. The aim is to redirect extension activities towards diversification into high value crops and products thereby increasing farm income and rural employment. With this market-driven approach to extension, it was envisaged that the ATMA body will make efforts to promote group of farmers and organize them around specific crops for commodities. These village level FIGs/CIGs are to be ultimately federated at Block/District level such as Block Level Farmers’ Association, District Level Farm Federations, etc. so as to make the technology generation/dissemination farmer-driven and farmer- accountable. A provision of Rs.10,000/- per FIG has been provided for mobilization of 1 group of 20 farmers and Rs.25,000/- as seed money (revolving fund) for viable FIG/CIG. There is a capping of 20 groups per

Page 27 of 122

block per year. FIGs/CIGs/FSGs are required to be federated as Farmers Producers Organizations (FPOs).

Women Food Security Groups (B.5.c):
Rural women play a very important role in agriculture. As such, it is proposed that ATMA should lay focus and address women’s’ issues through special interventions. To ensure food and nutritional security at the household level, it is proposed to support promotion of Farm women’s Food Security Groups (FSGs). These FSGs would be provided support for training, publication and access to inputs @ Rs.25,000/- per group. It is proposed that minimum 2 FSGs per Block per year is mandated under the scheme. These FSGs would serve as “Model Food Security Hubs” through establishing kitchen garden, backyard poultry, goatery, animal husbandry & dairying, mushroom cultivation, etc. These groups would essentially be provided input support including small tools, seeds, planting material for setting up backyard food security garden @ Rs.25,000/- per group.

B.6 Farmer Awards:
To incentivize best farmers representing different enterprises, a provision of Rs.10,000/- per farmer per year has been made. State may device a transparent mechanism to select the best farmers in relevant enterprise involving technical and scientific agencies. In identifying potential awardees, preference may be given to the farmers recognized for their production/productivity or progressive farmers recognized for their innovative farming practices. These individuals may be actively involved at block or village-level activities such as Farm Schools and other local agricultural initiatives, contributing to the community's development and knowledge sharing.
B.7 to B.9 Farm Information Dissemination through exhibitions, Mass Media, publication:
This includes local level agricultural exhibitions, low cost publications, information dissemination through printed materials and development of technology packages in electronic form. The cost norms of these activities may be seen in Annexure-V(a).
B.10 to B.12 Agriculture Technology Refinement, Validation and Adoption This includes to designate expert for each District from the Scientists of KVKs/SAUs, organization of Farmer-Scientist Interaction at local level, joint visits by scientist and extension personnel for which substantial financial provision has been made in the cafeteria, organization of Field- days and Kisan Goshthies and assessment, refinement, validation & adoption for frontline technologies and other short term researchable

Page 28 of 122

issues through KVKs and other local research centres. Cost norms of these activities are clearly indicated in the cafeteria. While designating District level experts from KVKs/SAUs, only those Scientists may be considered who have already participated in carrying out Farmers- Scientists-Interaction (FSIs) activity. Farmer Friend (FF) and Agri-Advisors (AAs) should also be involved actively in FSIs.

B.13 Administrative expenses:- As per details given in cafeteria.

B.14 Farm Schools :- (i)An important means to upgrade the process of dissemination of information in agriculture and allied sector is farmer-to-farmer approach, which is found to be very pertinent. The key feature of the Farm Schools being promoted under ATMA is that at least three Farm Schools to be set up in each Block in the field of outstanding or achiever farmers. Farm Schools and Farm School Trainers for each season would be finally approved by the ATMA GB; main activities of Farm Schools would be to operationalize frontline demonstrations in one hectare land in one or more crops/allied sector activities. Farm Schools would provide season long technical backstroking/training to target farmers by having an interactive session one at least during each of the four critical stages in a cropping season. 50% representation may be given to small and marginal farmers while selecting the trainees of the Farm Schools. Now, Farm Schools (FS)
will be organized in two models viz: Model I- at Progressive Farmer's field @ Rs.32,400/FS and Model-II - at Awardee farmer's field @ Rs.20,200/FS. Number of Critical stages have been reduced from existing Six to Four stages namely (i) Crown Root Initiation, (ii) Tillering, (iii)
Flowering and (iv) Milk & Dough stage.
(ii) The detailed concept of Farm School and item-wise cost norms may be seen in Annexure-V(b).
B.15 Farmer Friend:
The Farmer Friend (FF) will serve as a vital link between extension system and farmers at village level (one for every two villages). An amount of Rs.18,000/- per annum is payable to a farmer friend as a contingency amount.

Page 29 of 122

C Innovative Activities:
In order to encourage States for taking up innovative work in extension, it is proposed to provide Rs.25.00 lakh at State level and at District level @ Rs.0.50 lakh per block. For taking up innovative activities at State and District level, approval/rectification in the IDWG meeting would be required. Various innovative activities include:

C.1 PG Diploma in Agricultural Extension Management or Agricultural Marketing Management :- PGDAEM or PGDAMM for in-service extension functionaries continue to be implemented through MANAGE/NIAM releasing central share directly to MANAGE.
C.2 Innovative Activities-State level C.3 Innovative Activities-District level C.4 SETTING UP OF COMMUNITY RADIO STATIONS (CRSs)
i.
Community Radio Stations (CRS) have to be promoted in a big way to expand the reach of localised technologies to the farmers located within a radius of 20 to 50 Kilometers.
ii.
A total amount of not more than Rs.65 lakh (including capital and recurring cost) is proposed to be provided as assistance for CRS spread over operational period.There will be a ceiling of Rs.14.50 lakh on the capital cost but the same can be reviewed if substantially higher range than the present standard of 20 Kms. radius is proposed to be covered. Support for content creation at a rate not exceeding Rs.3,500/-per hour normally with a diminishing support structure of 730,540 and 200 hours respectively for first, second and third year will be provided. Some NGOs and KVKs may also use innovative technologies meeting minimum system requirement or contribution from some private players to reduce the capital cost. Subject to compliance of minimum technical specification for setting up of Community Radio Station, break-up of Rs.65.00 lakh is permitted to be changed from capital cost to recurring cost or recurring cost from one year to another. If cost of production can be reduced without diluting quality norms or there is some other financial support like advertisement, revenue or part of capital cost is diverted to recurring expenditure or a time lag between setting-up of CRS and start of

Page 30 of 122

programmes, recurring cost also can be taken to even beyond three years subject to overall cost ceiling. Further, year-wise cost ceilings per CRS have been given in the Cafeteria of Activities (D.2)
iii.
Funding to private institutions along with Government and Quasi- government organizations for setting up Community Radio Stations (CRSs) can be considered.
iv.
Community based organizations, Agencies/NGOs registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860 or any other such Act and recognized by the Central Government/State Government and serving in Agriculture and allied areas including SAUs and/KVKs are eligible for funding. Registration at the time of application should be at least three years old.
v.
The willing Organizations should have basic infrastructure and facilities in the form of a room of about 400 sq. feet/ electricity/ necessary manpower to run and operate the CRSs.
vi.
ATMA MC of the District concerned may select suitable proposal/s;
recommend them to the Nodal Officer/Commissioner of Agriculture of the concerned State for onward transmission to DAC through the competent committee, i.e., the IDWG having representation of SAU/ICAR Institutes/KVKs concerned so that the proposals are not referred again to ICAR by I&B Ministry which causes a considerable delay in granting approvals.
vii.
The PD, ATMA would regularly review the performance of CRSs along with other activities with the BTMs. In addition, ATMA GB would review the performance in detail with regard to content creation, involvement of local community, suitability to local conditions, release/utilization of funds for/by CRS and convergence & synergy with SAU/KVKs.
viii.
Any organization already sought CRS funding for 3 years will not be eligible for funding again under the Scheme.

D Manpower Support Details are given in chapter-III of this Guidelines and initial monthly remuneration rates mentioned in Activity D of ATMA Cafeteria,2025.

Page 31 of 122

B11(a)
Farmer Scientist Interactions at District level Farmer Scientist interactions at district level provide a platform for addressing farmers’ concerns on new technologies developed by research institutes and help in bringing forth various technological options for the coming season which is suited to the local situations. ATMA Cafeteria provides for Farmer Scientist interaction for a group of 25 farmers for 2 days @Rs.30,000/- per interaction. At least 3 such interactions, one before each crop season per year may be organised in each district with active involvement of local KVK, SAU Scientists and PD, ATMA of the district.
B11(b)
Joint Visits by Scientists and Extension Functionaries:
Joint visits by the PD ATMA/Extension workers at the district level KVK/SAU/ICAR scientists greatly helps in creating a common understanding of field level technological issues and providing an integrated solution to the problems faced by the farmers. In order to ensure proper mobility for field visits of the scientists accompanied by extension workers, funds have been provided under ATMA cafeteria for meeting the expenditure towards hiring of vehicles or POL @Rs.2,000/- per visit per district.
A.9 Extension through Interaction :
In order to provide greater opportunities of interaction between farmers and experts on regular basis, a mechanism through constitution of expert committees is proposed at State and National levels with involvement of domain experts of Agriculture, Horticulture, Animal Husbandry, Dairying, Fisheries, Veterinary, Sericulture and Agricultural Marketing, weather & meteorology etc. including those from banking and insurance sector.
For answering farmer’s queries and to resolve their problems from a single platform on a regular basis, it is proposed to put in place two Committees viz.
State Level Expert Committee and Central Level Expert Committee. The State Level Expert Committee (SLEC) is proposed to interact with farmers of the State through Video Conferencing on quarterly basis. It is proposed to collect, collate and prioritize farmers queries related to agriculture and all allied sectors across complete value chain i.e. from production to marketing, including other critical areas such as soil health, water use efficiency,waste/residue management etc. from all Blocks/Districts of a State using ATMA network. All important District Level queries are proposed to be documented at the level of State Nodal Cell (SNC). SNC is responsible to coordinate and implement interaction between farmers and scientists on regular basis through video conferencing. The cost norms for this activity are given at A.9 of the cafeteria.
The mechanism for Video Conferencing would be as under:-

Page 32 of 122

a) Interaction of 20-25 farmers per district with State Level Expert Committee (SLEC) at NIC District Centres.
b) Such Video Conference may be organized on quarterly basis.
a) Farmers’ queries to be sourced from ATM/BTM at Blocks to PD/ATMA at District to State Nodal Cell(SNC).
b) SNCs to scrutinize the farmers’ queries and prepare reply through experts.
c) Live interaction of experts with farmers on designated day through Video Conference.
d) Webcasting of VC for larger dissemination

Suggestive composition of State Level Expert Committee (SLSC) would be as under:- SN Designation Status 1.
Agriculture Production Commissioner/ Prin.
Secretary (Agri.) /Secretary (Agri.)
Chairman 2.
Director of Agriculture Vice-Chairman 3.
Director of Horticulture Member 4.
Director of Animal Husbandry Member 5.
Director of State Marketing Board Member 6.
Director of Sericulture/Fishery/Veterinary etc.
Member 7.
Directors (ICAR Institutes located in the State)
Member 8.
Director (Extension) / Director (Research), SAUs Member 9.
Head/Director, ICAR Institute Member 10.
Zonal Project Director, ICAR Member 11.
Director, Directorates of GOI located in the State Member 12.
Regional Director of IMD Member 13.
Director (SAMETI) / Addl. Director Agri (Extn.)
Member Secretary

4.3 Cost Norms under Cafeteria and activity ceiling:
(i)
The mandatory activities indicated in the Cafeteria should invariably form a part of the State Extension Work Plan. Administrative Expenditure including TA/DA, hiring of vehicles and POL and operational expenses at District/Block level shall not exceed the amount provided for in the cafeteria.
Financial allocation has been made specifically for the conduct of BFAC, DFAC, and joint visits of Scientists & Extension Functionaries under the cafeteria. The States should compute their budgetary requirements for mandatory activities, cafeteria activities as per State’s priorities, manpower support and emoluments as per approved norms. Any savings in administrative expenses can be diverted to other categories but not vice– versa.

Page 33 of 122

(ii) The norms as laid down in these Guidelines have to be adhered to but in exceptional cases and for reasons to be recorded in writing, ATMA Governing Board (GB) may go beyond these ceilings by up to 10% without exceeding overall allocation. Similarly, IDWG can authorize relaxation of up to 15%.
All such cases shall have to be reported in next year’s Work Plan so that appropriate advisories can be issued. Any deviation of more than 15% from the prescribed norms/ceilings or any activity not specified in the guidelines can be taken up by States only with the prior approval of DA&FW.

Page 34 of 122

V.Convergence between Agricultural Research and Extension

Page 35 of 122

V.
Convergence between Agricultural Research and Extension 5.
With a view to improve farm income and livelihood security of the farming households, the Government has been implementing number of programmes under various Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored schemes through the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare. This can be facilitated to a great extent through a demand driven technology development and its transfer to farmers in an effective way with a focus on ensuring convergence of efforts at different levels for rendering an integrated service delivery to the farmers. In particular, the linkages between National Agriculture Research System (NARS) and extension machinery at cutting edge level need to be strengthened.
5.1 While the concept of district level Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) has been promoted with an idea to provide a platform for integrated extension delivery involving all the stakeholders, Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs)
operating at the same level act as an outreach arm of National Agricultural Research System (NARS) facilitating validation and adoption of new technologies through frontline demonstrations, training & awareness programmes and other initiatives.
5.2 A detailed circular on research-extension convergence was last issued on 17th June, 2015 under joint signatures of Secretary, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare and Secretary, Department of Agricultural Research & Education & DG, ICAR indicating agreed and actionable points for both extension system in the State (represented by ATMA) and the NARS (represented by the State Agricultural Universities, ICAR Research Institutes and KVKs at the cutting edge level. There has been varying levels of progress in implementation of these guidelines across the States. The situation has been reviewed in light of operational concerns expressed by different stakeholders in implementation of these guidelines and recent developments at policy and operational front which require reiterating salient points of the earlier circular apart from new initiatives.
5.3 In order to ensure that the technology development for grass root level is demand driven and captures the critical gaps existing at technology and extension front, the farmers are able to gain desired benefits out of these interventions .The action points which have been agreed between the two departments are elaborated in the following paras :- 5.4 All the steps as laid down in the revised ATMA Guidelines to ensure better convergence between research and extension will be considered to utilize the built- in provisions under the ATMA Cafeteria.
i. Farmer Scientist Interactions (FSI) at District level: Farmer Scientist interactions at district level provide a platform for addressing farmers’ concerns on new technologies developed by research institutes and help in bringing forth various technological options for the coming season

Page 36 of 122

which is suited to the local situations. ATMA Cafeteria provides for Farmer Scientist interaction for a group of 25 farmers for 2 days @Rs.30,000/- per interaction. At least 2 such interactions, one before each crop season per year may be organized in each district with active involvement of local KVK and SAU Scientists and PD, ATMA of the district.
ii. The SAU may designate an expert who would be in-charge of one District to provide instant guidance to extension functionaries in the District. He/she will work in tandem with District Head of Agriculture and Allied Departments, Project Director ATMA and Programme Coordinator, KVK. A fixed amount of Rs.3000/- per month per district has been provided to meet expert honorarium of these officials related to returning calls of the farmers and other stakeholders that they may receive. IDWG may decide on break-up of the amount among four such officers as above in every district after considering mobile phone expenses already being reimbursed by the State Government and other organisations concerned and actual comparative necessity.
iii. Joint Visits by Scientists and Extension Functionaries: Joint visits by the PD ATMA/Extension workers at the district level KVK/SAU/ICAR scientists greatly helps in creating a common understanding of field level technological issues and providing an integrated solution to the problems faced by the farmers. In order to ensure proper mobility for field visits of the scientists accompanied by extension workers, funds have been provided under ATMA cafeteria for meeting the expenditure towards hiring of vehicles or POL @Rs.2,000/-per visit per district.
iv. Organization of Kisan Goshthies: To strengthen Research – Extension – Farmer linkages 1 Kisan Goshthi per block in each of the 2 seasons is envisaged in the ATMA cafeteria. KVK and SAU Scientists may plan the same with PD, ATMA and actively participate in the said event. Cost norm revised to Rs. 25000 per programme.
v. Assessment, Refinement, Validation & adoption of Frontline technologies and other short-term researchable issues: ATMA cafeteria provided Rs.7.00 lakh per district for undertaking research or refinement and validation of technologies arising out of the Strategic Research and Extension Plan (SREP) or any of those which are to be undertaken through KVKs and other local Research Centres.
vi. ATMA Management Committee having Programme Coordinator, KVK as its member may review the progress of technology application - related activities funded by ATMA. Besides this, the KVK may also provide an Agricultural Technology Update (ATU) on half-yearly basis

Page 37 of 122

i.e. before the start of Kharif and Rabi crop seasons to the ATMA for its wider dissemination among the farmers of the district.
vii. Interface meeting: Programme Coordinators of the KVKs in the District besides participating in the ATMA Governing Board should also have an interface meeting with the Project Director, ATMA once a month during the cropping season and work out a strategy of providing crop advisories to farmers for various stages of crop growth. Scientists available in the KVKs will advise and mentor Block Technology Teams in identifying technological needs in various Blocks in the District and programmatic interventions to meet such needs.
viii. Conduct of Field Days, Kisan Melas and Goshthies: ATMA and KVK should coordinate with each other in the conduct of Field Days, Kisan Melas, Goshthies and setting up of Farm Schools, so that there is no duplication in coverage and they should ensure percolation of appropriate scientific practices down to the field level.
ix. Release of Fund to KVKs: Funds for KVK activities under ATMA programme will be released directly to KVKs under intimation to respective controlling authorities i.e. Director Extension Education (DEE) & Comptroller and Directors of ICAR Institute in case of KVKs run by Agricultural Universities and ICAR institutes respectively. For the KVKs run by NGOs, funds will be released directly to KVKs under intimation to Zonal Project Directors of the zone concerned. Utilisation Certificates for the funds released by ATMA will be provided by the KVKs only. However, the respective host organisations and monitoring authorities (i.e. Agricultural Universities, ICAR institutes and Zonal Project Directors) will continue to supervise all activities of KVKs including the ones related to ATMA.
x. Documentation of Researchable Issues: The long term researchable issues may be documented, agro-climatic zone-wise with the involvement of Zonal Agricultural Research Stations (ZARS). These issues will be formally communicated to the concerned ZARS through the respective SAUs with the approval of the Inter- Departmental Working Group (IDWG). The IDWG having Vice- Chancellor/s of SAUs as well as Director(s) of ICAR institutes in the State as its members will review the progress of research work taken up by the ZARSs on such issues.
xi. Implementation of Flagship Programmes: KVKs will provide advice to ATMA and the District Administration for the implementation of Flagship programmes of the DA&FW covered under– RKVY and Krishonnati Yojana. The KVK Scientists will technically advise the Block Technology Teams (BTTs) and will also be actively involved in

Page 38 of 122

preparation of Block Action Plans (BAPs), especially with regard to research related issues/gaps and strategies. Regular participation of a KVK scientist in the meetings of Block Technology Teams will be ensured at least once in a quarter. The participating scientist will also take feedback for his colleagues in the KVK in respect of their respective areas of expertise.
xii. Involvement of SAUs/KVKs in Training and capacity building of Extension Functionaries under ATMA and Kisan Call Centres: The SAUs and KVKs act as a repository of technologies in agriculture and allied sector suited to specific local situations. Their active involvement in organizing orientation and refresher training programmes for these functionaries would greatly help them updating their technological knowledge for a better extension delivery.
xiii. Data Entry of Demonstrations by KVKs and SAUs: Data on demonstrations being organised by district ATMAs for agriculture and allied sectors (including diversification from one sector to another) is being entered in the Extension Reforms Monitoring System (ERMS)
(https://extensionreforms.dacnet.nic.in). The details of the same can be fetched from ERMS as well as from the Farmers’ Portal clicking at the link provided therein. However, some very useful and effective demonstrations carried out by SAUs / KVKs etc. have not been entered and thus not made part of the drillable database at the link given in the Farmers’ Portal. State Agricultural Universities (including Horticultural, Veterinary and Fisheries), Zonal Project Directors and KVKs to start doing data entry on the ERMS interface, so that farmers can know about the demonstrations of their interest that are taking place in their area and a scientific analysis of efficacy of various agricultural practices, new technologies, varieties of seeds/species etc. can be carried out.
xiv. Use of mKisan Portal for Sending Text and Voice Based Advisories to Farmers: The mKisan Portal launched by the DA&FW provides a very useful interface for sending text and voice based advisories to Farmers.
Scientist working in ICAR Headquarters, Zonal Project Directors, Research Institutes, & AICRPs, SAUS and KVKs may register as users in the portal and keep sending useful and need based advisories to targeted farmers using the mKisan interface. Feedback may be taken from farmers during Field Visits about usefulness of advisories.
xv. Involvement of Scientists from ICAR Institutes, SAUs and KVKs in providing Technical Backstopping to the Kisan Call Centres (KCCs):
The scientists from ICAR Institutes, SAUs and KVKs may be nominated to act as Call Conferencing experts with the Kisan Call Centres

Page 39 of 122

operating in respective States to answer the query of farmers which the Farm Tele Advisors (FTAs) at the KCCs are not able to answer. The Heads of Concerned Institutions may send a Roster of nominated experts at Monthly/Fortnightly intervals to the KCCs designated for the concerned States available on the link http://mkisan.gov.in/kccstatesinvolvement.aspx.
Similarly the Scientists from SAUs and SMSs in the KVKs may also be mapped in the Call Escalation Matrix of the Kisan Call Centres to provide their comments to State/District level officers of Agriculture and allied sector on the farmers queries escalated to them through KKMS as detailed at the link http://mkisan.gov.in/kccescalationmatrix.aspx.

5.5 Additional requirement of TA/DA, etc. will be met by the respective Departments from their own budgetary allocations. However, funds available under ATMA Cafeteria for Research-Extension-Farmer linkages may also be appropriately utilized.

5.6 Senior officials from DA&FW and DARE/ICAR would be visiting the States from time to time to review the progress in getting better coordination and interface between the scientific community and the State agriculture machinery on the one hand and the farmers on the other.

5.7 State Governments shall give wide publicity to this arrangement and furnish report on regular basis on the convergence matrix in prescribed format given at Annexure-II of ATMA Guidelines, 2025.

Page 40 of 122

VI. CONVERGENCE OF EXTENSION ACTIVITIES WITH OTHER SCHEMES

Page 41 of 122

6. CONVERGENCE OF EXTENSION WORK WITH OTHER SCHEMES 6.1.1. Farmers’ skill trainings and field extension as contained in other schemes of DA&FW may be converged with similar farmer-related activities going on through ATMA. Thus, for instance, Seed Village programmes under SMSP, capacity building of farmers through institutions identified by the State Government under SMAM and pest monitoring, Farmer Field Schools & Integrated Pest Management (IPM) trainings to farmers under SMPP will only be carried out through the district level institutions of ATMA and Block Technology Teams.
Mutually synergetic linkages will be established among various activities instead of unilaterally mandating that all such farmer-centric activities shall be carried out through ATMA. For instance, half day’s training given under Seed Village Programme shall also be made part of Farm Schools as, in any case, training on seed technologies form a part of 6 critical stages during which farmers are trained under Farm Schools conducted under ATMA.
This convergence should be institutionalized by ensuring that State Extension Work Plan [which emanates from Strategic Research and Extension Plan (SREP)] covers field level training & extension components. SREP is an ideal platform to provide convergence from the conceptual level and prioritization point of view. IDWG will further underline such a convergent approach at the State level.
6.1.2 A single ATMA Governing Board headed by the District Magistrate will provide commonality in approach & implementation and avoid duplication. ATMA Governing Board shall act as an over-arching umbrella at District level to oversee all extension related activities in other schemes of Pradhan Mantri -Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana(PM- RKVY) and Krishonnati Yojana(KY). Such a holistic approach will avoid duplication of efforts and promote more extensive & inclusive coverage of beneficiaries. The Integrated ICT platforms (such as Farmers’ Portal, State Agriculture Portals, Central Agriculture Portal) will also provide requisite impetus to implementation in the field level.
6.1.3.Convergence with other Farmer Centric Schemes of DA&FW: With the given man-power support, ATMAs will also look after the work related to other schemes of Pradhan Mantri -Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana(PM-RKVY) and Krishonnati Yojana(KY).
There should be full convergence of extension related work being carried out under different programmes/schemes. The field level extension workers under these different programmes/schemes should work in conjunction with the dedicated manpower being provided under this Scheme under the umbrella of BTT or ATMA, as the case may be.

Page 42 of 122

While these extension related workers & consultants under other schemes/programmes can continue to act as experts in their respective fields, they should also double up as multifunctional extension workers in the jurisdiction to be assigned to them by the BTT/ATMA. Budget for extension related components in different schemes and programmes of DA&FW shall be dovetailed at district level through ATMA. Once all the extension related workers start working in unison, they shall be fully responsible for achieving convergence & synergy in extension related work under PM-RKVY and KY Schemes to achieve complementarities and check duplication of efforts and resources.
6.1.4. Convergence with Research System: ATMA scheme provides for active involvement of Research System/ Research Agencies at different levels of implementation. State Agricultural Universities (SAUs) and Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs)
have to be fully involved not only in preparation of SREP and Extension Work Plans but also in implementation of various programmes in the field. They will be represented in all bodies, namely, ATMA GB and ATMA MC in districts, SLSC/ IDWGs at State level, BTT - BFAC Meetings at Block level. In addition, each KVK scientist may be made in charge of one or more Blocks within the district. The KVK Scientist will technically advise the BTT and will also be actively involved in preparation of BAPs, especially with regard to research related issues/gaps and strategies. He will also take feedback from his colleagues in the KVK in respect of their respective areas of expertise.
A joint circular on convergence between Agricultural Research and Extension signed by the Secretary (DARE) & DG, ICAR and the Secretary (A&C) was issued to all concerned on 17th June, 2015.

6.1.5 Joint Visits by Scientists and Extension Functionaries:
Quite often it has been seen that scientists of the Universities and ICAR Institutions refrain from making field visits due to inadequate provision of mobility in their budget.
In order to ensure proper mobility of the scientists accompanied by extension workers, funds have been provisioned for meeting the expenditure towards hiring of vehicles or POL expenses for field visits of scientists along with extension functionaries. It is expected that at-least 5 pre- identified villages would be covered in a month under the visit.
6.1.6 Convergence with Development Departments: Necessary convergence with all line departments is to be ensured through their involvement in the process of preparation of SREP and Work Plans at Block, District & State levels. Work Plans to be submitted to

Page 43 of 122

SLSC for approval should specify the activities which are to be supported out of resources from other schemes and activities which are to be funded under ATMA Scheme. Necessary convergence is to be ensured through integration of Comprehensive District Action Plans (CDAPs) and District Agriculture Action Plans (DAAPs) – all of which will form an integral part of Annual Action Plan(AAP) to be approved by State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) under Pradhan Mantri -Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana(PM-RKVY) and Krishonnati Yojana(KY).). Further, within approved allocations of Scheme, the State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) may also approve inter component changes as per need during the course of implementation of the Work Plan, within ambit of Guidelines, which should be reported to DA&FW immediately. Active involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in the selection of beneficiaries for various farmer oriented activities, including selection of Farmer Friend should be ensured.
6.1.7 Convergence with & Involvement of Non-Governmental Sector:

(a) In order to ensure promotion of multi-agency extension strategies, and to implement scheme activities in Service Provider mode, at least 10% of scheme allocation on recurring activities at district level is to be incurred through Non-Governmental Sector viz. NGOs, FOs, PRIs, Cooperatives, Para-Extension Workers, Agri-preneurs, Input Suppliers, etc. Non-governmental implementing agencies viz. NGOs, FOs, PRIs, Para- Extension Workers (except Agri-preneurs trained under ACABC) and Cooperatives will be eligible for service charge with a ceiling of 10% of the cost of extension activities (but no staff cost) implemented through them in addition to the cost of activity.
Outsourcing will nevertheless be confined to such activities where the organization concerned has expertise and requisite skills and the manpower deployed under ATMA is unable to perform such tasks due to multifarious tasks. Agri-preneurs under ACABC can also be covered for this 10% service charge and 100% cost of activity after they clear their loan liability though they can be called as experts on honorarium anytime for any training organized otherwise. These organizations are free to voluntarily contribute to the cost of training or fully/partially bear the service charges.
Exclusion of any Agri-preneurs or Para-extension workers from this category which are considered big enough can be done at the discretion of the State Governments concerned. These agencies will be identified at the district level on the basis of merit

Page 44 of 122

and approval of ATMA (GB) will be obtained. Competitive and transparent bidding process for this as per extent rules and regulations and financial norms. Expenditure incurred by the State Government for extension work (viz. service provider mode)
shall count towards the threshold figure of 10% as stipulated in sub-para (a) above.

6.2. NETWORKING:
State level bodies/ officers viz. State Nodal Officer/ State Coordinator/ Gender Coordinator will ensure networking of all ATMAs so as to foster information sharing (success stories, best practices, research/ extension issues, application of innovative technologies & strategies, etc.). All States/Districts shall share information regarding their activities/ innovations/ successes to the outside world on the national ATMA portal (www.extensionreforms.dacnet.nic.in). Also progress of the scheme activities shall be reported on the national ATMA portal.
This Portal shall also have links to related websites both at State and National level.

Page 45 of 122

VII. MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Page 46 of 122

7.
MONITORING & EVALUATION (M&E)/Monitoring Framework:
7.1 In order to ensure quality of extension activities, following monitoring framework is provided in the revised guidelines at different levels:
i. At Block Level: Block Farmers Advisory Committee (BFAC) and Block Technology Team (BTT) constituted under the Scheme will monitor Block level ATMA activities on quarterly basis by conducting a meeting of farmers along- with elected representatives of panchayat. Farmer Friend / ATM will coordinate and facilitate these meetings. Feedback of the meeting will be shared with the district-level agency for suitably incorporating in the future planning for improving effectiveness of the Scheme. Block Action Plan (BAP)
will be prepared at block level in consultation with BFAC & BTT.
ii. At District Level: ATMA Governing Board headed by DM or CDO or CEO as decided by DM will review and monitor District level ATMA activities in every quarter and decide integration and re-designing of on-going developmental schemes in accordance with the Strategic Research and Extension Plans (SREP) of the District. The Governing Board will provide policy directions that support effective functioning of ATMA in the district and amend the rules and bye-laws for the agency. ATMA management committee and District Farmers Advisory Committee (DFAC) will provide input for developing District Annual Agriculture Plan (DAAP) incorporating BAPs of all the blocks in the district.
PD, ATMA of the district will coordinate and facilitate convening of the meetings of ATMA, GB / ATMA, MC / DFAC at prescribed intervals.
iii. At State Level: State Nodal Cell (ATMA) compile District Annual Agriculture Plan (DAAP) of all the districts at the state level in the form of ‘State Extension Work Plan’ (SEWP) and place it before the Inter-Departmental Working Group (IDWG) in the meeting for consideration and approval before sending AAP to the SLSC constituted under the Chairperson-ship of the Chief Secretary of the State for approval of AAP of both PM-RKVY and KY Schemes. The IDWG

Page 47 of 122

under the chairperson-ship of APC/Pr. Secretary (Agriculture), may continue with the day to day (in its quarterly meetings) monitoring to ensure that the extension reforms are executed in line with the provisions contained in ATMA Guidelines. There is an in built provision in the Cafeteria of ATMA Activities to carry out concurrent evaluation for regular improvement in the quality of the schematic activities. It deals with things such as when the programme activities occur, where they occur, and who delivers them. Thus, it involves the evaluation of all the activities under taken to achieve programme objectives.
The feedback generated through this evaluation can be used for improving implementation of the programme by focusing on mid-season / term correction. The concurrent evaluation is to be undertaken every year during the course of implementation of the schematic activities. The purpose is to conduct a broad based SWOT (Strength, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats) analysis so that mid-course correction is initiated at the appropriate point of time. State Nodal Officer (ATMA) will coordinate and facilitate to convene the meetings of IDWG and SLSC at the prescribed periodic intervals.
iv. At National Level: Progress of extension work done by ATMAs through different extension activities shall also be monitored at national level on quarterly basis under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Extension). Joint Director (Extension Reforms) will initiate proposal to convene the National Level Review Meetings of ATMA activities on quarterly basis. A web-based interface (https://extensionreforms.da.gov.in) has been provided for regular monitoring of the progress of extension activities. Individual data of farmers under training, exposure visits and demonstrations needs to be entered in the web-based interface using the ICT infrastructure already available in the states.
Nodal Officers (State-Wise) will be identified at national level for field monitoring of ATMA activities. Extensive touring of the officers of the DA&FW / Directorate of Extension / MANAGE Faculty will be carried out for ‘on the spot monitoring’ of the field activities being undertaken under the scheme.

Page 48 of 122

7.2 Cumulative Monthly Progress Reports (MPRs) for each district are to be uploaded by the Project Director, ATMA in a web-based interface available at https://extensionreforms.dacnet.nic.inby day 5 of the following month. After ensuring that all the districts have entered their data, the SNO will validate this data for the entire State by day 10 of the following month. Submission of manual/ physical reports may be gradually phased out. The progress shall be given online on ERMS portal as digitized data is essentially required for monitoring progress on DBT portal.
Effective M&E will be ensured through regular field visits of Inter Disciplinary Teams in project areas, reports, interfaces, conferences etc. The scheme also provides for Concurrent Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) which will be carried out by Government of India. DA&FW will also organize concurrent M&E including impact evaluation as needed as part of its scheme “Extension Support to Central Institutes/DOE”. Besides, all activities of the scheme would continue to be reviewed on quarterly basis in meetings held at National Level.
7.3 For effective and efficient management of ATMA Scheme, the MoAFW will reply

on the data sharing mechanism of Agri Stack, Agri Stack is a Digital public

infrastructure which captures and maintains farmer registry, crops sown

registry, and geo-referenced village maps. The relevant data pertinent to

implementation of schemes will be consumed electronically (using open APIs) for

the purposes of beneficiary identification, verification, benefit delivery and

monitoring -pertaining to the states, Districts, villages where the data is

available. The information as and when collected and collated in the Farmers

registry, digital crop surveys, and geo- referenced village maps will be used for

implementation of this scheme.

Field on which data will be available in AgriStack is given at Annexure.

7.4 Progress of extension work done by ATMs at Block Level, Farm Schools, Demonstration Plots, Trainings, Exposure Visits and Farmer Friends will be closely monitored using ICT infrastructure and by regular monitoring & meetings by BTT at block level, ATMA at district level and SLSC at State level. A web-based interface (https://extensionreforms.dacnet.nic.in) has been provided for the purpose. Individual-wise data of farmers under trainings and exposure visits needs to be entered in the web based interface above using the ICT infrastructure already available there in the states. Till the time hand-held devices are made available as a part of ITD Interventions, BTMs and ATMs should be encouraged to use their Smart Phones using software to be provided to upload pictures of trainings. Suitable incentive not exceeding Rs.50/- per training may be provided for uploading the pictures of such trainings.

Page 49 of 122

7.5 Impact Assessment Studies of extension work done by Farm Schools, CIGs & FFs under ATMA shall be got conducted by expert agencies and corrective action shall be taken timely to attain objectives of revitalization of Agriculture Extension System.
7.6 Extensive touring of officers of the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation& Farmers’ Welfare/Directorate of Extension, MANAGE faculty, State/District level officials will be carried out for the on-spot monitoring of field activities being undertaken.
7.7 Concurrent Evaluation : It is concerned with how the program is delivered. It deals with things such as when the program activities occur, where they occur, and who delivers them. Thus, it involves the evaluation of all the activities undertaken to achieve programme objectives. The information generated through this evaluation can be used for improving implementation of the programme by focusing on mid-season/term correction. It is also referred as ‘formative’ or ‘process’ evaluation. Yearly concurrent/process evaluation of all activities to be undertaken to achieve programme objectives. The concurrent evaluation is to be taken up every year during the course of implementation of the programme. The purpose is to conduct a broad based SWOT (Strength, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats) analysis so that mid-course correction is initiated at the appropriate point of time. The funds may be utilized for engaging personnel for data collection, compilation, analysis, data processing, evaluation, etc. on task basis.

Page 50 of 122

VIII. BUDGET ALLOCATION, RELEASE & UTILISATION

Page 51 of 122

8.
ALLOCATIONS AND SCHEME COST 8.1 Centre–State Share : The funding support for the Scheme shall be in the ratio

of 60:40 (Centre : State) between Central and State Governments and on 90:10

basis (Centre : State)between central and North-Eastern and Himalayan States

for all components including Farmer Friend. 100% GOI funding support to be

provided to UTs for all components.
8.2 State-wise Allocation Criteria : Some States have very small districts whereas some other States have very large districts but the size of the Block does not vary much from State to State. Therefore, funds available under the scheme shall be initially allocated to States after giving weightage to the number of Blocks, number of farm families in the State and number of dedicated deployed manpower. Actual release of resources to States shall, however, be on the basis of approved work plans, pace of utilization of funds and physical progress.
8.3 Incentive to States for Better Performance : The States may prepare a large shelf of projects/activities and submit them to the Department at beginning of financial year. Better performing States will be encouraged to seek higher revised allocations against approved activities in respect of Work Plans submitted by them. Such allocations over and above tentative allocation already communicated to States will depend upon relative progress in implementation and pace of expenditure amongst various States and over all availability of funds. However, it is clarified that the expenditure during the year will be restricted by States to funds actually placed at their disposal by the DA&FW and States should not incur expenditure in excess of funds already available with the States. Any proposal to the DA&FW in the following financial year for reimbursement of excess expenditure will not be entertained. Thus, State may not create any liability.
8.4. RELEASE OF FUNDS :
8.4.1 Funds will be released for implementing the Scheme, in four equal installments. State Governments to comply all the instructions of Department of Expenditure O.M dated 23.03.2021 and 23.03.2022. 75% of annual allocation(3 equal installments) will be released upon approved SEWP by SLSC/in-principle approval of SEWP by the Chairman of SLSC and Provisional Utilization Certificate (PUC) & Annual Progress Report (APR) of previous financial year.
Additional 25% of allocation(4th installment) will be released upon approved SEWP by SLSC, AUC & APR of the previous year and latest MPR showing at least 75% utilization of earlier release (central + state share). The State will be

Page 52 of 122

required to submit a written request for release of funds. Revised procedure for release of CSS funds to States i.e. SNA-Sparsh will be applicable as per instructions of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. Release of fourth instalment will depend upon furnishing of the following documents:
(i)
Approved/ratified SEWP by SLSC.
(ii)
Audited Utilization Certificate (AUC) & Audited Statement of Expenditure (ASoE) for the previous year.
(iii)
Monthly Progress Report for previous month (iv)
Annual progress report for the previous year (v)
Transfer of the stipulated State’s share to the Single Nodal Account (SNA)
against funds provided by Central Government upto the previous year.
(vi)
Consolidated proposal for release of funds to be submitted to KY Cell through Nodal Officer designated by the State Government.
8.5 Manual reports may be phased out gradually 8.5.1 The State Government will transfer the Central share received in its account to the SNA’s account concerned within a period of 21 days of its receipts. The Central share shall not be diverted to the personal deposit account or any other account by the State Government. Corresponding State share should be released as early as possible and not later than 30 days of release of the Central share.
8.5.2 State Governments will follow the revised procedure for release of CSS funds /Just -in- time release using SNA-SPARSH Platform as per the instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance time to time.
8.5.3 The States need to follow a definite time frame for fund releases from State level to District level (within a fortnight of receipt of funds from DA&FW) and from Districts to line departments/other agencies (within 10 days of receipt of money at district level) to ensure expeditious implementation of the Scheme.

Page 53 of 122

IX. OTHER OPERATIONAL MATTERS

Page 54 of 122

OTHER OPERATIONAL MATTERS

9.1 Extent of Coverage: The Scheme shall be implemented in all districts across the country.
9.2 Incentives for difficult areas : In order to carry out extension activities in

difficult areas, an additional 10% allocation may be made by the states in the difficult areas viz: Left Wing Affected Districts, North Eastern & Hilly States, Aspirational Districts and Double Stressed Districts.
9.3 Individual beneficiary oriented activities:
i.
The Cafeteria of Activities contains some individual beneficiary oriented components as well. Some of such activities include farmers training, demonstrations, farm schools, farmer-scientist interactions & exposure visits which have been culled out from the cafeteria and summarized in Annexure XI.
ii.
Transparent and objective selection of beneficiaries is of paramount importance not only to generate confidence of the farmers in the Scheme but also to ensure that benefits of extension services get disseminated to all sections of the Society. Therefore, selection of beneficiaries should be done in the following manner:
a) All Panchayats in a Block should be covered on a rotation basis under various components. The Panchayats to be covered in a year should be decided by the BTT in consultation with the BFAC.
b) Activity mapping of Panchayati Raj Institution (PRI) is at ANNEXURE-X.
c) Number of beneficiaries of different categories including SC/ST in shortlisted Panchayats will be decided by the BTT in proportion to their population in consultation with BFAC so as to have a balanced coverage.
d) At least 50% beneficiaries must be Small and Marginal Farmers and 30% beneficiaries should be women farmers/farm women.
e) Individual beneficiaries of demonstration plots, inter-district & inter-state trainings within a Panchayat area and all farmer group beneficiaries should be selected by the respective Gram Sabha or Gram Panchayats in consultation with FIGs and FOs working in the area, as the State Government may decide. However, if for some reasons, the list of beneficiaries is not finalized in the above manner within the stipulated time frame, the FAC in consultation with FIGs and FOs may select the beneficiaries for various activities under the scheme.

Page 55 of 122

f) For rewards and incentives at different levels, beneficiaries may be identified by the States in a transparent manner. It should be ensured that no farmer gets double benefits of the same kind from different schemes.
g) ATMAs should capture Unique Identification (UID) details of the farmer beneficiaries under the components of availing training, exposure visits, demonstration plots, farm schools, revolving fund for the CIGs etc. and upload the details in the Extension Reforms Monitoring System (ERMS)
Portal developed by the Department.
9.4 Common Issues related to ATMA Cafeteria:

i.
Minimum 30% of resources meant for programmes and activities are required to be allocated to women farmers and women extension functionaries. Specific documentation of expenditure and performance for women may be kept.
ii.
No expenditure shall be incurred from extension work plan allocation on ineligible items. In the event of any such expenditure, the ineligible expenses shall be deducted from the State’s allocation, next year.
iii.
Operational Expenses under State Level, District & Block level Activities and Innovative Activities may also include library, internet, telephone and other contingencies.
iv.
Any sub-detailing not specified under ATMA Cafeteria such as for Demonstrations, Trainings and Exposure Visits, would be as approved under an appropriate scheme of the Central/State Govt. Otherwise, prior approval would have to be obtained from IDWG.
v.
Unless otherwise specified under some compelling circumstances, or in case of States which are not eligible for PM-RKVY funding, the SLSC set up in the State for considering proposals for PM-RKVY funding will also consider and approve SEWP and carry out periodic monitoring. In exceptional cases, the

If the list of beneficiaries is not finalized in time, the BFAC in consultation with FIGs &FOs may select the beneficiaries

Page 56 of 122

existing procedure for approval of SEWP through IDWG at the State level and Executive Committee of SMAE will continue to be followed. The IDWG under the chairmanship of APC/PS (Agriculture) may continue to perform monitoring of the Scheme to ensure that the Extension Reforms are executed as per these Guidelines. The IDWG shall meet at least once in every quarter.
vi.
Programmatic funds should be spent on rain-fed areas at least in proportion to the extent of rain-fed areas in the district.
9.5 Promotion of Multi-Agency Extension Strategy :
(i)
In order to ensure promotion of multi-agency extension strategies, and to implement scheme activities in Service Provider mode, at least 10% of scheme allocation on recurring activities at district level is to be incurred through Non- Governmental Sector viz. NGOs, FOs, PRIs, Cooperatives, Para-Extension Workers, Agri-preneurs, Input Suppliers, etc. Since a lot of manpower and infrastructure has been given under the Scheme for providing extension services, the State Government should fix an upper limit on extension services in Service Provider mode. This percentage limit should be clearly spelt out in the SEWP.
(ii)
Non-governmental implementing agencies viz. NGOs, FOs, PRIs, Para-Extension Workers (except Agri-preneurs trained under ACABC) and Cooperatives will be eligible for service charge with a ceiling of 10% of the cost of extension activities (but no staff cost) implemented through them in addition to the cost of activity.
Outsourcing will nevertheless be confined to such activities where the organisation concerned has expertise and requisite skills and the manpower deployed under ATMA is unable to perform such tasks due to multifarious tasks. Agri-preneurs under ACABC can also be covered for this 10% service charge and 100% cost of activity after they clear their loan liability though they can be called as experts on honorarium anytime for any training organized otherwise. These organizations are free to voluntarily contribute to the cost of training or fully/partially bear the service charges.

Page 57 of 122

ANNEXURE-I STATEMENT SHOWING NATIONAL PRIORITY AREAS FOR EXTENSION ACTIVITIES IDENTIFIED FROM THE INPUTS GIVEN BY VARIOUS DIVISIONS OF DA&FW ---------

The identified thematic areas of farmer training include:

National Priority Areas/Themes:-

i.
Natural Farming ii.
Climate Resilient Agriculture, iii.
Crop Diversification, iv.
National Pest Survelliance System, v.
Soil Health Card advisories vi.
Digital Agriculture Mission vii.
Post-harvest management viii.
Market led extension ix.
Seed production and seed technology aspects x.
Promotion of good agricultural practices.
xi.
Integrated pest management practices in major crops xii.
Holistic growth of Horticulture sector covering fruits, vegetables, root and tuber crops, mushrooms, spices, flowers, aromatic plants, coconut, cocoa and bamboo.
xiii.
Judicious use of chemical fertilizers based on the recommendations of Soil Health Card xiv.
Promotion of National Mission on Oilseeds.
xv.
Promotion of less water consuming Millets/Nutri-cereal crops xvi.
Registration of farmers on custom hiring Centre app xvii. Coarse cereals and coarse cereal based cropping systems for maize and barley xviii. Federating FIGs/CIGs/FSGs as FPOs xix.
Agricultural Mechanization xx.
Integrated Farming System in Rain-fed Areas xxi.
Honey bee

Page 58 of 122

xxii. Kitchen Gardening xxiii. Extension trainings for Export clusters of APEDA State Priority Areas - Based on the technological gaps arisen out of SREPs, States may also decide areas of training, exposure visits, demonstrations and farm schools as per their priority.

.

ANNEXURE-II

CONVERGENCE MATRIX ON JOINT CIRCULAR OF ICAR & DA&FW

(i) No. of Districts :- (ii) No. of Blocks

:- (iii) Name 2-3 Good Agricultural Practices being promoted and their impact in terms of production and increasing farmers’ income.

S. No. Matrix Unit Norm Target Achievement 1.
Monthly Interface Meeting Nos.
12/Annum

2.
Pre-seasonal Technical Updation & Farmer- Scientist Interaction at District level Nos.
per annum (1 each before crop season – Rabi/ Kharif/Zaid)

3.
Expert Designated at District level Nos.
1/District

4.
Joint Visits by PD, ATMA and PC, KVK Nos.
Joint Visits

5.
Districts where Direct Routing of ATMA fund to KVKs Nos.
Nos.
of District

Page 59 of 122

ANNEXURE-III(a)
INTER DEPARTMENTAL WORKING GROUP (IDWG)
In pursuance of the number of mechanisms built into the project design and to ensure effective coordination among Departments like Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Fisheries, Horticulture, Soil Conservation etc., a State level Inter Departmental Working Group under the Chairmanship of the Agriculture Production Commissioner/ Principal Secretary (Agriculture) with the following composition would continue to monitor the scheme activities. The IDWG will meet once in every Quarter Composition:
1.
Agriculture Production Commissioner/

Principal Secretary (Agriculture)

Chairman 2.
Secretary (Finance)

Member 3.
Secretary (Agriculture)

Member 4.
Secretary (Horticulture)

Member 5.
Secretary (Animal Husbandry)

Member 6.
Secretary (Rural Development)

Member 7.
Secretary (Fisheries)

Member 8.
Secretary (Soil Conservation)

Member 9.
Secretary (Women & Child Development)
Member 10.
Secretaries of related Departments

Member

11.
Vice Chancellor(s) of SAU(s)

Member 12.
Director(s) of ICAR Institutes in the State Member 13.
NABARD Representative at the State level Member 14.
Director, Doordarshan

Member 15.
Director, All India Radio

Member 16.
Director (SAMETI)

Member 17.
Two Progressive Farmer (preferably 1 male Member and 1 female 18.
Commissioner/Director(Agri.)/

Member State Nodal Officer

Secretary Note: In departments like Horticulture, Soil Conservation etc., where separate Secretaries do not exist, Directors of the Departments concerned may act as Members on the IDWG.
Key functions of IDWG  To consider and recommend State Extension Work Plan for its approval by State Level Sanctioning Committee headed by Chief Secretary/ Addl. Chief Secretary or Technical Committee in DA&FW.
 Support and monitor the functioning of State Nodal Cell including timely preparation for necessary approvals and its subsequent execution.
 Provide a mechanism for interactions with the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation and amongst various Departments within the State including Agricultural Research system.

Page 60 of 122

 Promote an enabling environment with necessary policy directions for achieving necessary convergence for execution of SMAE activities at State, District and Block levels.
 To internalize Innovative concepts and institutional arrangements successfully demonstrated by the ATMAs for the purpose of up-scaling and replication.
 To provide guidance on HRD/Capacity building matters through State level Committee/Executive Committee of SAMETI.
 To provide guidance to Chairmen, ATMA Governing Board for day to day execution of ATMA activities.
 To provide guidance for convergence mechanism for all Farmer centric schemes.
 To deal with any other policy issue related to implementation of the project, which emerges from time to time.
 To review activities of SAMETIs on regular basis.

Page 61 of 122

ANNEXURE-III(b)
STATE AGRICULTURAL MANAGEMENT AND EXTENSION TRAINING INSTITUTE (SAMETI)
The State Agricultural Extension Management and Training Institute (SAMETI) would be strengthened in terms of infrastructure and manpower. The State Level Committee (SLC)
suggested as part of the guidelines for development of complementarity in State/District Training Plan communicated to States vide D.O. letter No. 26(4)/2008-AE dated 4.12.2008 will function as Executive Committee of SAMETI with the same composition and mandate. In addition to the membership of the SLC stipulated in the guidelines dated 04.12.2008, three farmers shall be nominated by the State Farmers Advisory Committee to participate in the deliberations of Executive Committee of SAMETI. The SLC will guide the SAMETI to achieve the aims and objectives specified in the Guidelines with the involvement of all suggested Stakeholders.
Key functions of SAMETI  Provide capacity building support in Extension Management related areas to the extension functionaries from public, private and non-governmental sectors.
 Provide consultancy in the areas like project planning, appraisal, implementation, monitoring & evaluation, etc.
 Develop and promote application of management tools for improving the effectiveness of Agricultural Extension services.
 Organize need based training programmes for middle level extension functionaries.
 Develop modules on Management, Communication, Participatory Methodologies etc., as a sequel to the feedback from training programmes.
 Organize Annual Workshop involving all the agricultural related training Institutes in the State to achieve complementarity in training and capacity building for functionaries of agriculture and allied departments.
 Will coordinate with MANAGE in organizing DAESI programme.

Page 62 of 122

ANNEXURE-III(c)
ATMA GOVERNING BOARD (GB)

The ATMA Governing Board (GB) is a policy making body which provides guidance, reviews & steers the progress and functioning of the ATMA.
COMPOSITION 1.
District Magistrate or Chief Development Officer (CDO)/Chief Executive Officer (CEO) as decided by DM Chairman 2.
District Head of Agriculture Department Member 3.
Representative of Zila Panchayat/Zila Parishad Member 4.
District Head of Fisheries Member 5.
District Head of Horticulture Member 6.
District Head of (Animal Husbandry/Sericulture)
Members 7.
One representative from Zonal Research Station (ZRS)
Member 8.
Programme Coordinator, Krishi Vigyan Kendra Member 9.
Lead Bank Officer of the District Member 10.
Representative from District Industrial Centre Member 11.
Representative from Agriculture Marketing Board Member 12.
Representative from DRDA Member 13.
One Farmer representative Member 14.
One Livestock Producer Member 15.
One Horticulture Farmer Member 16.
One Representative of Women Food Security Group Member 17.
One Representative of FIG/CIG Member 18.
One SC/ST farmer representative Member 19.
A representative of NGO working in Agriculture/Allied Sector Member 20.
Representative of input supplying Association Member 21.
A representative of trained input dealers who is also providing extension services Member 22.
Representative from companies availing tax benefit u/s 35CCC (if available)
Member 23.
One farmer representative from Fisheries/Sericulture sector Member 24.
Project Director ATMA Member- Secretary-cum- Treasurer (Ex- officio)

Note:
1.
All non-official member of GB are to be nominated by the District Farmers Advisory Committee by consensus or by majority.

Page 63 of 122

2.
Out of the non-official members so nominated one-third would be women farmers and one-third would be farmers from small & marginal category.
3.
The non-official members will be appointed as the member of GB for a period of 2 years.
Key functions of ATMA Governing Board The key functions of ATMA Governing Board would be to:
1.
Review and approve Strategic Research and Extension Plan (SREP) and annual action plans that are prepared and submitted by the participating units.
2.
Receive and review annual reports presented by the participating units, providing feedback and direction to them as needed, for various research and extension activities being carried out within the district.
3.
Receive and allocate project funds to carry out priority research, extension and related activities within the district.
4.
Foster the organization and development of Farmers’ Interest Groups (FIGs) and Farmers Organizations (FOs) within the district.
5.
Facilitate greater involvement of private sector and firms and organizations in providing inputs, technical support, agro-processing and marketing services to farmers.
6.
Encourage agriculture lending institutions to increase the availability of capital to resource poor and marginal farmers, especially SC, ST and women farmers.
7.
Encourage each line department, plus the KVK and ZRS, to establish farmer advisory committees to provide feedback and input for their respective Research - Extension Programmes.
8.
Enter into contracts and agreements as appropriate to promote and support agricultural development activities within the district.
9.
Identify other sources of financial support that would help in ensuring the financial sustainability of the ATMA and its participating units.
10.
Converge human and financial resources available for extension under different schemes and programmes of DA&FW.
11.
Establish revolving funds/accounts for each participating unit, and encourage each unit to make available technical services, such as artificial insemination or soil testing, on a cost recovery basis moving towards full cost recovery in a phased manner.
12.
Arrange for the periodic audit of ATMA’s financial accounts.
13.
Adopt and amend the rules and by-laws for the ATMA.
14.
Meetings of ATMA GB must be convened in every quarter.
15.
Any other functions that support effective functioning of ATMA in the district.
16.
To decide integration and re-designing of on-going developmental schemes in accordance with District SREP.

Page 64 of 122

ANNEXURE-III(d)
ATMA MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE (MC)

The Management Committee would be responsible for planning and execution of day- to-day activities of ATMA.
Composition:
1.
District Head of Dept., Agriculture Chairman 2.
Project Director of Agriculture Technology Management Agency Co-Chairman 3.
District Head of Dept., Horticulture Member 4.
District Head of Dept., Animal Husbandry Member 5.
District Head of Dept. Fisheries Member 6.
District Head of Dept. Sericulture Member 7.
Head, Krishi Vigyan Kendra Member 8.
Head, Zonal Research Station Member 9.
Project Officer, District Rural Development Agency Member 10.
One representative of Farmers’ Organization promoted by an NGO Member 12.
Representative of NGO, if any, involved in agricultural extension Member District level NABARD Officer Member Lead Bank Officer Member A representative of trained input dealers who is also providing extension services Member 16.
Two progressive farmers (one of whom should be a woman)
(nominated from DFAC)
Member 17.
Two Deputy Project Directors (of which one will be nominated as Member Secretary)
Member Secretary

Note:
(i) States may also consider co-opting additional members, if required.
(ii) All farmer representatives are to be nominated by the District Farmers Advisory Committee by consensus or by majority.

Page 65 of 122

Key functions of Management Committee (MC)

1.
Carryout periodic Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) to identify the problems and constraints faced by different socio-economic groups and farmers within the district.
2.
Prepare an integrated, Strategic Research and Extension Plan (SREP) for the district that would specify short and medium term adaptive research as well as technology validation and refinement and extension priorities for the district.
3.
Prepare annual District Agriculture Action Plans in consultation with DFAC which would be submitted to the ATMA Governing Board for review, possible modification and approval.
4.
Maintain appropriate project accounts for audit purposes.
5.
Coordinate the execution of these annual action plans through participant line departments, ZRSs, KVKs, NGOs, FIGs/FOs and allied institutions, including private sector firms.
6.
Establish coordinating mechanisms at the Block level, such as Farm Information & Advisory Centres (FIACs) that would integrate extension and technology transfer activities at the block and village levels.
7.
Provide periodic performance reports as required by DA&FW to the Governing Board outlining the various targets and achievements.
8.
Provide secretariat to Governing Board and initiate action on policy direction, investment decisions and other guidance received from the Governing Board.
9.
ATMA Management Committee shall meet once in a month to review the progress in various blocks and submit the report to State Nodal Cell/DA&FW.

Page 66 of 122

ANNEXURE-III(e)
BLOCK TECHNOLOGY TEAM (BTT)

It is an Inter Departmental Team of Agriculture and Line Departments operating at block level. An indicative composition of BTT is given below. However, the composition would change from place to place depending on the critical areas pertaining to different blocks in a State.
Composition:
BTT shall consist of Chairman Block Panchayat SAMETI, Block level officers of Agriculture, Horticulture, Animal Husbandry, Fisheries, Plant Protection, Veterinary Science, Soil Conservation, Extension, Sericulture, Cooperative, Marketing etc. Block Technology Manager would be the Member Secretary. A designated scientist from the KVK will also attend meetings of BTT, provide requisite technical guidance and take feedback for his colleagues in the KVK in respect of their respective areas of expertise.
The senior most official at the Block level shall head the Block Technology Team as BTT Convener.
Key functions of Block Technology Team (BTT)
 Operationalize the SREP in each block and move towards single window extension system.
 Help district core team in up gradation of SREP.
 Prepare Block Action Plan detailing extension activities to be undertaken.
 Coordinate the implementation of extension programmes detailed in the Block Action Plan.
 Facilitate formation of FIGs/ Women Food Security Groups/ FOs at the block level and below.
 Support ATMA Management Committee in discharging its function by providing inputs related to the Block.
 Facilitate planning and implementation of Farm Schools in all major sectors in the Block.
 The Block Technology Team (BTT) shall meet every month to review the progress and report the same to ATMA Management Committee.

Page 67 of 122

ANNEXURE-III(f)
FARMERS ADVISORY COMMITTEES AT BLOCK, DISTRICT, AND STATE LEVEL

The Block Farmers Advisory Committee (BFAC) shall comprise not more than 30 members as per details given below:
1. Pramukh/Head of Panchayat SAMETI/Chairman Taluk Panchayat Mandal Parishad President (MPP) of the concerned Block will be ex-officio member of BFAC.
2. All members of Zila Parishad/Zila Panchayat of the concerned Block will be ex- officio members of BFAC.
3. 25 progressive farmers of the Block who are either awardee farmers or trained farmers from agriculture and allied sector would be nominated as members of BFAC.
4. The States shall evolve and notify their own transparent and democratic mechanism for nomination of progressive farmers. Out of the progressive farmers so nominated one-third would be women farmers and one-third would be farmers from small & marginal category. Adequate representation shall be given to SC/ST farmers.
5. Duration of a BFAC shall be two years after which new set of farmers shall constitute the BFAC.
6. Chairman shall be elected out of the above members on rotation basis.
7. BTM would be Member Secretary of the BFAC.

 Once in every quarter the Farmer Member of BFAC will conduct a meeting of farmers at the Panchayat level along with the elected representatives of Panchayat on matters related to Agriculture & allied sector and give his feedback in BFAC meetings. Kisan Mitra/Kisan Salahakar/Subject Matter specialist (as the case may be) at Panchayat level will coordinate and facilitate such a meeting.

The District Farmers Advisory Committee (DFAC) shall comprise not more than 40 members.
i)
Chairman of BFAC from not more than 35 Blocks of the District would be member of DFAC or on rotation basis if numbers of Blocks are more.
ii)
Five State level awardee farmers of the concerned District from Agriculture & Allied Sector will be nominated by District Head of Agriculture giving due representation to farmers from small/marginal category, Women farmers and SC/ST Farmers.
iii)
The States shall evolve and notify their own transparent and democratic mechanism for nomination of awardee farmers by District Head of Agriculture.
iv)
Duration of a DFAC shall be two years after which new set of farmers shall constitute the DFAC.
v)
PD (ATMA) shall act as Chairman of DFAC.
vi)
District Coordinator KVK will be member of DFAC.
The State Farmers’ Advisory Committee shall comprise not more than 30 farmers (numbers will be restricted depending on number of Districts in the State):
i)
One progressive farmer who is either an Awardee farmer or trained farmer from agriculture and allied sector may be nominated from each DFAC. If the number of District is more than 25, rotation mode may be followed.

Page 68 of 122

ii)
The States shall evolve and notify their own transparent and democratic mechanism for nomination of progressive farmer from each DFAC. Out of the progressive farmers so nominated one-third would be women farmers and one-third would be farmers from small & marginal category. Adequate representation should be given to SC/ST farmers.
iii)
Five National level Awardee farmers in Agriculture and allied sector would be nominated by Director/Commissioner of Agriculture giving due representation to farmers from small /marginal category and Women farmers.
iv)
Duration of a SFAC shall be two years after which new set of farmers shall constitute the SFAC.
v)
Director (Agri.) shall act as Chairman of SFAC vi)
SNO, ATMA shall act as Member Secretary of SFAC

Key functions of BFAC/DFAC/SFAC  Act as an agency for providing farmers’ feedback and inputs for preparation/compilation of Action Plans and for prioritization of activities as follows:
(i)
BFAC to BTT (ii)
DFAC to ATMA GB and MC (through nominated representatives)
(iii)
SFAC to SAMETI for training related needs and SNC for finalization of SEWP (through nominated representatives)

NOTE: These administrative bodies will necessarily consider suggestions given by these Advisory Committees based on technical feasibility and financial viability (including availability of funds).If inputs are not received from these Advisory Committees before the meetings of BTT, ATMA (GB and MC), SAMETI or by SNC in time, the respective administrative bodies need not delay their deliberations and decision making solely on this account.
 FACs shall meet as per the following periodicities:

(i)
BFAC: Once in a month during the season and quarterly in lean season.
(ii)
DFAC: Quarterly and preferably before ATMA MC.
(iii)
SFAC: Quarterly

 Help in formation and nurturing of Farmer Interest Groups at Block level and below:
The National Farmer’s Advisory Committee (NFAC): The composition of the committee will be as under:
1.
Minister of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare – Chairman 2.
MoS (A) – Vice-Chairman 3.
One Farmer representative from SFAC of each States - Member 4.
Seven Members having knowledge of the Agriculture Sector to be nominated by the

Central Govt. – Member 5.
One representative each from National Cooperatives Organizations- Member 6.
One representative each from Ministry of Water Resources, Department of Fertilizer,

Department of Food, Department of RD etc. (not below the rank of Joint Secretary).

Page 69 of 122

7.
Duration of a NFAC shall be two years after which new set of farmers shall

constitute the NFAC.
8.
JS (Extn.), DA&FW- Member Secretary

Key Functions of NFAC

The functions of the Committee will be to advise the policy makers on the following matters:-

i.
To liaise between the Policy makers and farmers regarding formulation of policy, Scheme and Guidelines.
ii.
To influence policy makers and other stake-holders for encouraging entrepreneurial spirit amongst the farmers; and iii.
To create an enabling environment for agri-business.
iv.
To evolve Risk Management/Disaster Management strategy in agriculture;
v.
To advise the policy makers on pesticide, irrigation, seeds & other input related issues;
vi.
Interaction with the policy makers regarding price fixation and marketing of agricultural commodities;
vii.
To act as a forum capable of lobbying for farmers’ issues for the country as a whole.

Page 70 of 122

ANNEXURE – IV (a)
SPECIALIST AND FUNCTIONARY SUPPORT ELIGIBLE UNDER THE SCHEME

Specialist and Functionary Support Revised monthly ‘initial ceiling’* Revised Annual ‘initial ceiling’* Remarks STATE LEVEL State Nodal Cell 1. State Coordinator (one)
Rs.60,000/-month each Rs.7,20,000/- year for each One State Coordinator 2. Gender Coordinator (one)
Rs.50,000/-month each Rs.6,00,000/- year for each One Gender Coordinator SAMETI 1. Director (one)
2. Faculty in the thrust areas (4 or or 12)(HRD, Agriculture Extension Management, IT & Post Harvest Management)
3. Accountant-cum- Establishment Clerk (one)

Pay Scales/remuneration as per Annexure- IV (c)
Faculty positions linked to No. of Blocks in the State (<100 Blocks – 4, 100- 400 Blocks – 8 and > 400 Blocks – 12)
Director’s post should not be filled on contractual / outsource basis.
4. Computer Programmer (one)/Computer Operator Rs.25,000/- per month Rs.3,00,000/-year

DISTRICT AND BLOCK LEVEL AT DISTRICT LEVEL 1. Project Director, ATMA (1)
2. Dy. Project Director ATMA(2)
3. Accountant-cum Establishment Clerk (1)

Pay Scales/Remuneration as per Annexure- IV(c)

4. Computer Programmer / computer Operator (1)
Rs.25,000/- per month Rs.3,00,000/- per year See note given below.
AT BLOCK LEVEL 1. Block Technology Manager (BTM) (1)
Rs.30,000/-

Rs.3,60,000/- year

2.Assistant Technology Manager (Average 3 per block)
Rs.25,000/- Rs.3,00,000/- year

* Revised monthly ‘initial ceiling’ or Revised annual activity ‘initial ceiling’ will be applicable only for ‘initial fixation’ of emolument’/ for fresh deployment of manpower. However, in case of existing manpower who is continue their service beyond one year, para 3.4.8 (iv) of guidelines may be followed.

Page 71 of 122

ANNEXURE-IV (b)
DUTIES/RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE SPECIALISTS AND FUNCTIONARIES

S. No.
Name of Unit /Agency Designation of Post Duties/ Responsibilities Village

1.Farmer Friend (FF)
- Mobilization of farmers / constitution of Farmer Interest Groups.
- Conducting field demonstrations, Kisan Goshthies and facilitating preparation of Village Research Extension Action Plan - Liaison with ATM at Block level for exchange of information related to agri. and allied activities at field level - Attending meetings of Gram Sabha, maintaining a daily diary of activities - Ensuring dissemination of information through multi media - Any other work assigned by BTT 2 Block 1.Assistant Technology Manager (ATM)

- Handholding of FPOs at Block level.
- Participation in the FPO meetings.
- Imparting farmers training.
- To provide requisite technical & knowledge support to farm school, FF, FIGs /CIGs /FSGs /FPOs and farmers in general.
- Out of three ATMs, one ATM should be trained in marketing.
- In consultation with Block level officers of agri. and allied departments & BTMs, ATMs will provide necessary inputs to Common Service Centres & Kisan Call Centres.
- Any other work assigned by BTM.

2.
Block Technology Manager (BTM)
- Handholding of FPOs at Block level.
- Participation in the FPO meetings.
- Imparting farmers training.
- Coordination with line departments - Organizing meetings of BTTs & FACs, Feedback to BTT and ATMA - Assist the BTT in the preparation of BAPs - Operationalisation of Farm Schools - Compilation of progress of implementation - Advise to the farmers/ FIGs/ CIGS/FPOs in consultation with line departments.

Page 72 of 122

- Maintain an inventory of FIGs/FOs/CIGs/FPOs within the Block.
- BTM will also assist the BTT in carrying out functions listed at Annexure-III(e)
District ATMA 1. Project Director

- Liaison with SNO and SAMETI at State level and coordination between line departments including KVK, PRI, Private Sector and Planning Units at district level.
- Finalization of District Annual Action Plans - Review of the progress of implementation of Extension Reform, RKVY and NFSM.
- Convening meetings of GB, ATMA - Hold ATMA Management Committee Meetings - Serve as Member Secretary of ATMA, Governing Board (GB)

2. Deputy Project Director – I(General)

- Overall responsible for research related issues and activities - Review & prioritization of local research needs based on SREP.
- Coordination and follow-up with KVK and other R&D institution for assessment, refinement, validation and adoption of new technologies.
- Organizing district level R-E-F interface, Krishi Melas/Exhibition etc.
- Capacity building of extension functionaries of all line departments in collaboration with KVKs and other institutions.

3. Deputy Project Director – II(With Marketing Expertise)

- Out of two existing DPDs, 1 DPD may be trained in marketing - Serve as Member Secretary of ATMA MC - Coordination with Line Departments including Private Sector.
- Compilation of Block Action Plans into DAAPs.
- Implementation, monitoring of DAAP, RKVY & NFSM and feedback to PD, ATMA.
- Capacity building of farmers and FIGs in collaboration with KVKs and other institutions - Promote Post-Harvest Management and Market Led Extension

4. Computer Programmer/Co mputer Operator

- To maintain the Extension Reforms portal up to date and maintain the complete data related to the scheme.
- Maintain and update data of the District of all other web-based portal.
- Ensure digital payment.

Page 73 of 122

- Ensure DBT in both cash and kind.

5.Accountant- cum- Establishment- Clerk - To maintain up to date account of the scheme - Activity-wise and month-wise expenditure - Payment of salaries to staff - Annual Budget Estimates - Annual Accounts of ATMA 4.
State Level Training Institute (SAMETI)
1. Director

- Capacity building of extension functionaries.
- Development of Human Resources as per emerging needs.
- Networking with the concerned institutions of both Public & Private Sector - Organizing studies.
- Convening meetings of Executive council and General Counsel of SAMETI.
- Accounts & Administrative matters of SAMETI.

2. Deputy Director/ Faculty - Organizing training courses of their respective areas.
- Networking with the resource persons.
- Evaluation of training courses.
- Training needs assessment.
- Preparation of Annual Training Calendar.
- Regular field visits to different parts of the districts to interact with farmers and grass root level functionaries

3.Computer Programmer/Co mputer Operator 1. Computer Programmer:
- Basic programming skills in developing testing/debugging of application software (including static & dynamic websites) and database management.
- To maintain the Extension Reforms portal up to date and maintain the complete data related to the scheme 2. Computer Operator: Quick and accurate data entry operations in English & language of the State;
full command over office automation packages such as MS Office/Open Office;
- Should be able to handle basic hardware issues (including Operating System, Anti-virus, PDF etc.) relating to PCs, printers and switches.
- To maintain the Extension Reforms portal up to date and maintain the complete data related to

Page 74 of 122

the scheme

4.Accountant- cum- Establishment- Clerk - To maintain up to date account of the scheme - Activity-wise and month-wise expenditure - Payment of salaries to staff - Annual Budget Estimates - Annual Accounts of ATMA 5.
State HQs Nodal Cell 1.State Coordinator - Liaison with the ATMAs at district level and line Departments including SAU/SAMETI at state level and Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare at National Level.
- Compilation of DAAP, etc. into State Plan.
- Compilation of progress and timely feedback to State and Central Government - Assessment for capacity building of the line departments.

2.Gender Coordinator - Ensure flow of benefits under all schemes to women farmers.
- Collection of gender dis-aggregated data, and conducting studies and action research in critical thrust areas - Promote Farm women’s Food Security Groups and prepare training module so as to ensure household food security.
- Document the best practices/ Success Stories/ Participatory Material Production related to women in Agriculture - Block-wise documentation, prioritization and addressing farm women’s needs and requirements in agriculture and all allied sectors - Will report to State Coordinator in r/o gender related information

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA ANNEXURE – IV(c)
ABSTRACT OF NUMBER OF POSTS, REMUNERATION AND ELIGIBILITY Level Designation No. of Posts Suggested Mode of Recruitment Pay Scale/ Remuneration Qualification Educational Qualification Suggested Experience State State Coordinator/ contractual / outsource basis Vide Para 3.4.3 of Guidelines Doctorate or Post Graduate degree in Agriculture, Agriculture Extension, Agronomy, Horticulture, Fisheries, Soil Sciences, Agriculture Economics, and other allied sector Minimum years of experience in coordination and planning for PhDs and 20 years for Masters, Gender Coordinator Contractual/ outsource basis Vide Para 3.4.3 of Guidelines Post graduate degree in Agriculture, and allied sector including Home Science Extension, or Sociology.
Minimum years of experience in agriculture extension or gender related work for PhDs and 20 years for Masters.
Accountant cum clerk Deputation/ Secondment/ Appointment Pay level 6 (35,400- 1,12,400) or old scale as per 6thCPC (9300- 34,800 +4200GP)
Graduate, preferably B.Com

Note: Same experience and qualification applies to Computer programmers at all levels including State, SAMETI and District levels Minimum 3 years’ experience in the Grade Pay of Rs.2,400 (as per 6thCPC)
In case of contractual /outsource basis manpower as an interim measure 3 years’

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA experience of accountancy in a reputed organization to the satisfaction of the State Government.
Computer programmer or Computer Operator Contractual/ outsource basis Vide Para 3.4.3 of Guidelines B. Tech in Computers/MCA for CP and BCA or Graduate with computer skill.

1 year experience for B.
Tech and 2 years for MCA SAMETI Director Deputation/ Secondment/ Appointment Pay level (1,23,100- 2,15,900) or old scale as per 6thCPC (37,400- 67,000+ GP)
Post graduate in Agriculture/allied sector with 3 experience in Agri.
Extension Management Minimum years’ experience in the scale of Rs.15,600-39,100 + 6600 GP (as per 6thCPC)
Deputy Director ** <100 Blocks Deputation/ Secondment/ Appointment Pay level 11 (67,700- 2,08,700) or old scale as per 6thCPC(15,600- 39,100+ 6600GP)
Post-Graduation in their respective areas.
Minimum 3 years’ experience in the scale of Rs.15,600 -39,100+5400 (As per 6thCPC).
In case of contractual/ outsourced Deputy Directors, an experience of 6 years as a faculty member in the respective field from a reputed organization / institution (to the satisfaction of the 100 - Blocks 401 & more Blocks ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA State Government).
Accountant-cum- Establishment- Clerk Deputation/ Secondment/ Appointment Pay level 6 (35,400- 1,12,400) or old scale as per 6thCPC (9300- 34,800 +4200GP)
Graduate, preferably B.Com Same as Accountant at State level Computer programmer or Computer Operator Contractual/ outsource basis Vide Para 3.4.3 of Guidelines B. Tech in Computers/MCA for CP and BCA or Graduate with computer skill.

1 year experience for B.
Tech and 2 years for MCA District

Project Director Deputation/ Secondment/ Appointment Pay level 11 (67,700- 2,08,700) or old scale as per 6thCPC (15,600- 39,100+ 6600GP)
Post Graduate in Agriculture/Allied Sectors Minimum years’ experience in the scale of Rs.15600-39100+5400 (as per 6thCPC)
Deputy Project Director Deputation/ Secondment/ Appointment Pay level 10 (56,100-177500)
or old scale as per 6thCPC (15,600-39,100+ 5400GP)
Post Graduate in Agriculture/Allied Sectors and for second post of DPD with expertise in marketing Minimum 3 years’ experience in the scale of Rs.9300-34,800+4200 (as per 6th CPC)
In case of contractual or outsource basis as an interim measure Deputy

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA PD, 5 years’ experience in managerial or supervisory capacity in agriculture & allied sectors. BTM having 5 years working experience is also eligible for DPD on contractual/ outsource basis.
Accountant-cum- Clerk Deputation/ Secondment/ Appointment Pay level 6 (35400- 112400)or old scale as per 6thCPC (9300- 34800 +4200GP)
Graduate, preferably ‘B.Com’ Same as Accountant at State level Computer programmer or Computer Operator Contractual/ outsource basis Vide Para 3.4.3 of Guidelines B. Tech./MCA for Computer Programmer and BCA/Graduate with computer skills for computer operator 1 year experience for B.
Tech and 2 years for MCA Block Block Technology Manager Contractual/ outsource basis Vide Para 3.4.3 of Guidelines Post Graduate** in Agri. / Allied Sector with computer skills or Agri-Graduates with atleast 5 years working experience as ATM.
Minimum 2 years field experience in Agri.
Related activities.

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Assistant Technology Manager Avg. 3 per block Contractual/ outsource basis Vide Para 3.4.3 of Guidelines Graduate (Agri. & Allied Sectors)/Post Graduate (Agri. & Allied Sectors)
Minimum one year experience in Agri.
Related activities Village Farmer Friend 1 over every 2 villages Identification/ selection Vide Para 3.4.9 of Guidelines Senior Secondary / High School Practicing progressive farmer with good communication skills and ability to adopt new technologies in agri./ allied sectors.

Note: Educational qualification and experience criteria may be relaxed for the already deployed contractual /outsourced manpower

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA ANNEXURE-V(a)
ATMA CAFETERIA LIST OF ACTIVITIES ELIGIBLE UNDER THE SCHEME ‘SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES FOR EXTENSION REFORMS’ AND ASSOCIATED COST CEILINGS/ NORMS A.
State Level Activities

(Amount in Lakh)
S.
No.
Indicative Activities to be Undertaken Revised Cost norms Remarks Unit Unit Cost Ceiling Total Tentative Ceiling on Activity 2 4 6 A.1 Monitoring & evaluation

(a) Quarterly review workshops and R-E Interfaces (pre-seasonal).
Per workshop/ Interface 1.00* * Cost Norms for NER and Himalayan States will be @ 2.00 3.00 for General States & 6.00 for NER & Himalayan States/UTs Up to a maximum of 3 Workshops per annum.
Cost norms increased in view of price escalation since 2014-15 (b)Concurrent Monitoring & Evaluation.
Annually Up to 20.00

 10.00 Lakh for States below 100 blocks  12.00 Lakh for States with to blocks  15.00 Lakh to blocks 20.00 Lakh for States with above 400 Cost norms increased in view of price escalation since 2014-15

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA blocks (c) Expenses for Inter Departmental Working Group on extension reforms and other contingencies including Operational support TA/ DA, hiring of vehicle/POL, and contingencies for SNO Per year Up to 15.00

Up to 15.00  7.00 Lakh for States below 100 blocks  9.00 Lakh for States with to blocks  12.00 Lakh for States with to blocks  15.00 Lakh for States with above blocks This includes other operational expenses for State Farmers Advisory Committee Meetings (SFAC)
A.2 (a) Training courses – National/ Inter State / within the State (SAMETI) level - Both Govt. & Non- Govt.
extension functionaries (including NGOs, Para Extension Workers, Input Suppliers, Farmer Friends, BTM, ATM(at KVKs) Project Director, Dy.
Project Director, Director SAMETI & Faculty of SAMETI etc.)
Per participant Per day 0.02 in case ‘out of district’ venue of the training ; and

0.015 in case ‘with in district’ venue of the training 2.00 per block

100 mandays per Block (for trainings preferably between 3 to 30 days).

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA (b) Induction Training of ATMA functionaries Per Participant per day 0.015 in case ‘out of district’ venue of the training ; and 0.01 in case ‘with in district’ venue of the training Actual For newly recruited BTMs & ATMs (c) Refresher Training of all ATMA functionaries Per Participant per day 0.015 in case ‘out of district’ venue of the training ; and 0.01 in case ‘with in district’ venue of the training Actual ATM & BTM other than those provided induction training A.3 Exposure Visit of extension functionaries & members of Advisory Committees to progressive States (A group of minimum 5 participants).
Per participant per day 0.015 in case ‘out of district’ venue of the Exposure Visit ; and 0.01 in case ‘with in district’ venue of the Exposure Visit Avg. 0.75 per block 25 mandays per Block per Batch (2 batches)
(excluding journey time)
A.4 Organization of State level exhibitions/Kisan Melas/Fruit/ Vegetable Shows, etc.
Per Year 8.00 8.00 One Exhibition per year

A.5 Participation in Krishi Expo & Regional Fair organized /supported by DAC.
Per State 3.00 3.00 Actual limited to the activity ceiling A.6 Award for best performing ATMA Per Year 1.50 1.50 Trophies and certificates can be given for overall performance and for selected activities.

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA A.7

(a) Farmer Awards – Best farmers representing different areas of agriculture  State level

per year per farmer

0.50

5.00

 10 farmers per state @2 farmers per activity A.8 (a) Operational expenses Per year Avg. 0.15 per block with a minimum of 10.00 per SAMETI

Rs.0.15 lakh per Block with a minimum of Rs.10.00 per SAMETI (b) Documentation of success stories etc. (preparation and dissemination).
Per year 6.00

(c) Vehicle hiring and POL Per year 6.00 6.00

Non – Recurring

(d) Equipment

One time  Maximum Rs.9.00 per SAMETI  Rs.4.00 for less than 100 blocks  Rs.5.00 with 100-200 blocks  Rs.7.0 with 201- 400 blocks  Rs.9.00 with more than 400 blocks One time Grant shall only be used when the hard- ware/equipment becomes obsolete.

A.9 Extension through interaction Per Interaction/District 0.025 0.10 Rs.100 per farmer for a group of 25 farmers at a district.
Expenses on contingency /refreshment/ lunch/ tea etc.
4 no of interactions in a year

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA DISTRICT LEVEL ACTIVITIES S.
No.
Indicative activities to be Undertaken Revised Cost norms Remarks Unit Cost Norms Revised activity ceiling 2 4 7

I. Farmer oriented activities B.1 Developing Strategic Research & Extension Plan (SREP)
Per district 2.50 2.50 SREP to be revisited after every 5 years.
B.2

Training of farmers for not more than 7, 5 and 2 day’s duration respectively (excluding journey time).

(a) Inter-State (7 days)
Per farmer per day 0.0150 0.60 per Block Cost norms are inclusive expenses on Travel of the farmer, Refreshments / Meals and Stay during training, venue charges, training material, Training kit and agricultural inputs, if any, cost of honorarium (limited to norms as per Model Training Courses

(b) Within State (5 days)
Per farmer per day 0.0125 1.00 per Block

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Guidelines for outside experts and not for departmental officials)

(c) Within District level (2 days)
RPL based training of farmers Per farmer per day 0.005 4.00 per Block days RPL based training in the respective areas and certificate of progressive farmers to be given.

(d) Skill Training of Rural Youth (25 days)
Per Rural Youth Per Day 0.005 1.25 per Block Rural youth per Block per year.
B.3 Organizing demonstrations

(a) Demonstration (Agri.)
Per demonstration Upto 0.06 per demo of 0.4 hac.
plot/area 4.80 per Block 80 demonstrations

40 demonstrations Soil Testing /Soil Health Card is mandatory for conducting Demonstration

(b) Demonstration (allied Sector)
Per demonstration 0.06 per demo for allied sectors 2.40per Block B.4 Exposure visit of farmers –

 Inter State Per participants per day

0.015* * Cost Norms for NER and Himalayan States will be @ 0.02 0.375 per Block 25 mandays per Block.
Maximum period of an Exposure Visit not to exceed days (excluding journey time)

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA (the cost should be limited to actual travelling expenditure and boarding/lodging cost).
Likely expenditure or State/location specific cost norms needs to be got approved in advance from the ATMA Governing Board.
 Within the State 0.01* * Cost Norms for NER and Himalayan States will be @ 0.0125 0.80 per Block mandays for a maximum period not to exceed days (excluding journey time).
 Within District

0.005 0.30 per Block mandays for a maximum period not to exceed 01day (excluding journey time)
B.5 Mobilization of farmer groups of different types including Farmer Interest Groups, Women Groups, Farmer Organizations, Commodity Organizations, and Farmer Cooperatives etc.

(a) Their capacity building, skill development and support services Per group/ per year 0.1 2.00 per Block 20 groups per block (b) Seed money /revolving fund Per group 0.25 2.00 per Block Only to viable groups on competitive basis

(c) Food Security Groups Per group 0.25 0.50 per Block FSGs/Block is mandatory. These will

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA be all women farmers’ groups and Seed Money will be given for Household food security garden.
B.6 Farmer Awards  District level

 Block level Per year per farmer

0.25

0.10

2.50 lakh per Block

0.50 lakh per Block  10 farmers per District @2 farmers per activity  Best farmers representing different enterprises at Block Level.

II. Farm Information dissemination B.7 District level exhibitions, Kisan Melas, fruits/ vegetable shows.
Per district 6.00 6.00 per District Wider publicity of all the central as well as state government initiatives / schemes for the benefit of famers.
B.8 a)
Information dissemination through Mass Media, printed leaflets etc.
and local advertisements.
Per district 6.00 6.00 per District b) low cost publication Per Publication 0.0002 1.20 per District Desirable component copies of publications @ Rs.20/- publication (max.) to be distributed in all the villages of the block (100 villages)

c) Kala Jatha Per Kala Jatha 0.20 5.00 per District

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA B.9 Development of technology packages in digital form to be shared through IT network.
Per package 0.50 5.00 per District For production of max.
10 packages

III. Agricultural Technology Refinement, Validation and Adoption B.10 (a) Farmer Scientist Interactions at district level 25 farmers for 2 days.
Per interaction 0.30 0.90 per District interactions per district (@1/season)

(b) Designate expert support from KVK/SAU at District Level Per Month/per District 0.03 0.36 per District KVKs/SAUs/ Agriculture Research Institutes have to designate expert in charge of one district.
He would provide instant guidance to district functionaries/ BTMs/ATMs within his respective district. The support is to be provided as an incentive for sharing their expertise in their respective fields in addition to their official duties.

(c) Joint visits by Scientists & Extension Workers per visit per district 0.02 0.52 per District Desirable Component 26 visits during each year B.11 Organization of Kisan Gosthies to Per programme 0.25 0.50 per Block One Kisan Gosthies per

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA strengthen research – extension – farmer linkages (1 per block in each of the 2 seasons).

Block in each of the two seasons.
B.12 Assessment, Refinement, Validation and adoption of Frontline technologies and other short term researchable issues through KVK sand other local Research Centres.
Per District 7.00 7.00 per District As per assessment of KVK/ local Research Centres/ and/or issues emerging from SREP

IV. Administrative / Capital expenses at District and Block level B.13 RECURRING

* Cost Norms for item c, d, e for NER and Himalayan States will be @ 1.25 times of Normal States

Four meetings @Rs.400/- per Farmer for 25 Farmers.
Six BFAC meetings @Rs.200/- per farmers for 25 farmers.
(a) TA/DA and Operational expenses for district level * Per district/year 10.00 10.00 per District (b) Hiring of vehicles and POL Per district/year 2.0 2.0 per District (c)
Operational Expenses exclusively for block level (including Hiring of Vehicles and POL)

Per Block/per year

1.00*

1.00*

(d)
Operational Expenses for DFAC Meetings Per Meeting 0.10*

0.40*

(e)
Operational Expenses for BFAC Meetings Per Meeting 0.05*

0.30*

Non – Recurring (i) Equipment (Computer etc.)

(i) Per District

5.00

5.00 per District One time Grant. Shall only be used when the hardware becomes obsolete.

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA B.14 Farm School:
(i) Model-I: At Progressive Farmer (PF) Field; and

(ii) Model-II: At Awardee Farmer Field Per Farm School (i) Model-I

(ii) Model -II 0.32,400

0.20,200 Actuals 5 farm schools per block per year. Soil Testing /Soil Health Card is mandatory for setting -up of Farm School.
B.15 Farmer Friend-One FF/2 Village Per annum per FF 0.18 0.18 per FF per annum Uniform fund sharing pattern will be adopted i.e. on 60:40 basis for General States, 90:10 basis for NER & Himalayan States and 100% Central Share for UTs.
C.
Innovative Activities – State Level C.1

PG Diploma in Agricultural Extension Management or Agricultural Marketing Management

per beneficiary

0.20

1.00 per District Government of India share would be released to MANAGE/NIAM directly on behalf of the State Governments based on the number of participants.
Ceiling of 5 officials per ATMA per year.
C.2 Innovative activities – State component Per State/per Year 25.00 25.00 Approval/ratification in IDWG meeting.
C.3 Innovative activities – District Per block/per Year 0.50 0.50 Approval/ratification in

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA component IDWG meeting.
C.4 Setting up CRS (capital cost)
Per CRS 14.50 14.50 Total amount of not more than Rs.65.00 lakh (including capital and recurring cost) is proposed to be provided as assistance per CRS spread over operation period.

(i)
Content Creation

1st year for two hrs. of daily programme i.e. 730 hrs/year.

Per Hour 0.035/hour

25.50 (ii)
2nd year for one and half-hour of daily prog. i.e. 540hrs./year Per Hour 0.035/hour 18.00 (iii)
3rd year for one and half-hour of daily prog. i.e. 200 hrs./year Per Hour 0.035/hour 7.00 D.
Manpower Support D1 State Coordinator -1 per State Per month 0.60 7.20 per annum contractual /outsource basis D2 Gender Coordinator -1 per State Per month 0.50 6.00 per annum contractual /outsource basis D3 Director SAMETI -1 per SAMETI Per month Rs.18500-214100 Scale of pay Rs.18500-214100 Scale of pay On Deputation. Scale of pay is indicative D4 Deputy Director SAMETI  4 DDs in States <100 Blocks  8 DDs in States: 100-400 Blocks  12 DDs in States >400 Blocks Per month 0.55 6.60 per DD per annum Proposed to be filled by Government officials on deputation / secondment/ appointment.
D5 Accountant-cum-Clerk at SAMETI & SNC - 1 each at SAMETI and SNC Per month 0.30 3.60 per Accountant per annum Proposed to be filled by Government officials on deputation / secondment/ appointment.
D6 Computer Programmer (CP) at Per month 0.25 3.00 per CP per annum contractual or outsource

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA SAMETI & SNC 1 CP each at SAMETI and SNC level D7 Project Director -1 Per District Per month Rs.67,700-2,08,700 Rs.67,700-2,08,700 Proposed to be filled by Government officials on deputation / secondment/ appointment.
D8 Deputy Project Director-2 DPDs per District Per month 0.52 6.24 per contractual /outsource basis DPD per annum Proposed to be filled by Government officials on deputation / secondment/ appointment.
D9 Accountant-cum-Clerk at District level - One Per District Per month 0.30 3.60 per Accountant per annum Proposed to be filled by Government officials on deputation / secondment/ appointment.
D10 Computer Programmer (CP) at District level - One CP Per District Per month 0.25 3.00 per CP per annum contractual / outsource D11 Block Technology Manager (BTM)
- One BTM Per Block Per month 0.30 3.60 per BTM per annum contractual /outsource D12 Assistant Technology Manager (ATM) - 2-4 per Block as per details given in para 3.3.3(ii).
Per month 0.25 3.00 per ATM per annum contractual /outsource

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA ANNEXURE-V(b)

CONCEPT AND COST NORMS OF FARM SCHOOL

(i) Key features of the Farm Schools to be promoted under the ATMA programme are given below:
(ii) Farm Schools would be operationalized at Block/Gram Panchayat level.
(iii) These would be set up in the field of outstanding or achiever farmers. The list of such farmers having potential for organizing farm schools in the Block for different sectors will be identified jointly by FAC and BTT and sent to ATMA GB through the Panchayat Samiti (block level elected body of Panchayati Raj Institutions). “Farm Schools” and “Farm School Trainers” for each season will finally be approved by the ATMA GB.
(iv) “Teachers” in the Farm Schools could be progressive farmers, extension functionaries or experts belonging to Government or Non-Government Sector.
(v) One of the main activities of Farm Schools would be to operationalize Front Line Demonstrations in one or more crops and/or allied sector activities.
These demonstrations would focus on Integrated Crop Management including field preparation, seed treatment, IPM, INM, etc.
(vi) Farm Schools would provide season long technical backstopping/training to target farmers by having an interactive session once at least during each of the 6 critical stages in a cropping season.
(vii) While selecting the trainee farmers, about 50% representation should be given to small and marginal farmers. Preference may be given to members of CIGs/FIGs.
(viii) “Students” will visit Farm Schools as per specified schedule or as may be necessary. “Teachers” may also visit students as may be necessary.
(ix) Knowledge and skills of “teachers” would be upgraded on a continuous basis through training at district/ state/ national level institutions and/or exposure visits, etc.
(x) In addition to technical support through Farm Schools, knowledge and skill of “students” may also be upgraded through training at District/State level and exposure visits, etc. “Students” would have the responsibility of providing extension support to other farmers in the respective village or neighbouring villages.
(xi) Maximum Service Charge to achiever farmer may be 10% of the total cost incurred on item No.1-5 of Farm School cost norm given at (Appendix-II).

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA (xii) Achiever Farmer, while conducting the Farm School, can take the technical support from KVK scientists and extension personnel to explain the scientific rationale behind a particular practice.
(xiii) Either Training or Exposure Visit of about 5 to 6 days of the Progressive/ Achiever Farmer is supported under the Farm School as per norms approved in the Cafeteria.
(xiv) Trainees would bear their own travel expenses. BTM should act as coordinator for Farm Schools with periodic monitoring of the activities done at his level (at least 1 visit at every critical crop stages) to oversee and monitor the functioning & maintain record of visits. He may arrange an Interface between the achiever farmers (taking up Farm School) and the BTT & KVK scientists at least on quarterly basis to exchange ideas at district level.
(xv) Performance of all farm schools in each block should be reviewed at BTT-FAC meetings on a half-yearly basis and by ATMA GBs on an annual basis.
(xvi) For the reasons to be recorded in writing, highly successful Farm Schools may be continued for another season or two, with provision of only recurring expenses during subsequent years/seasons. When continued in subsequent seasons, the participants should be selected from villages/panchayats not covered in the earlier Farm Schools.
(xvii) States may consider suitably awarding the best Farm school in the district/state.
(xviii) Trainings in Farm School should be flexible and non-lecture based with emphasis on hands-on-experience, observation, analysis and discussions.
(xix) Farm School concept (nature, periodicity & training) needs to be revisited and improved by taking various innovative steps such as involving non- academic experts also from farming and business community and also including Indigenous Technical Knowledge. New training aids like Pico Projectors can be used.

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA OPERATIONALIZING FARM SCHOOL AT BLOCK / GRAM PANCHAYAT LEVEL COST NORMS/ CEILINGS

S.No.
Farm School (Block /GP Level)
Present cost - norms of FS (in Rs.)
Proposed cost - norms of FS (in Rs.)
Model- 1 in the field of Progressive Farmer(PF)
Model- 2- in the field of Awardee Farmer(AF)
Frontline demonstration at Farm School on a maximum area of 2.5 acre 7,500 5,000 (as per NFSM Cost-Norms)
NIL (FOR AF Model)
Grant towards logistics support to Farm School 1,000 1,500 1,500 Contingency 2,000 1,500 1,500 IPM Kit to 25 Farm School trainees @ Rs.
200/- per kit.
5,000 5,000 5,000 Details of interactions / training at Farm School 6 stages 4 stages 4 stages (a)
Honorarium for maximum two external trainer( ICAR/SAUs/KVKs) for maximum 4 visit in Critical Stages((Crown Root Initiation, Tillering, Flowering and Milk & dough stage)@ maximum of Rs.250 per visit per trainer(Proposed to be increased to @ Rs.500/visit/trainer.)
3,000 4,000 NIL (b)
Travel expenses for maximum two external trainer for maximum 4 visits @ maximum of Rs.150 per trainer per visit (Proposed to be increased to @ Rs.300/visit/trainer.)
1,800 2,400 NIL (c)
Food expenses for 28 participants @ Rs.30 per participant per day for 4 events.Proposed to be increased to @ Rs.60/farmer/day.
5,040 7,200 7,200 (d)
Printed literature @ Rs.50 per participant for 28 participants and trainers(Proposed to be increased to @ Rs.100/participants &trainer.)
1,400 2,800 NIL Total:
26,740 24,400 15,200 Maximum service charge to achiever farmer/ Implementing agency running the Farm School as per decision of GB, ATMA 2,674 3,000 5,000

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Grand Total:
29,414 32,400 20,200 Note : Stage wise photographs of every visit should be uploaded on Krishi Mapper mobile app of DA&FW

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA ANNEXURE-V(c)
Illustrative List of Optimum & Realistic Targets and Likely Shortfall which may be met from PM-RKVY

(Rs. in crore)
S.
No Scheme/ Component Norms Ideal Units funded under SMAE States may like to access RKVY funding Total Amount reqd. from RKVY

ATMA SCHEME

1.
Low Cost Publication 3 publications, 10 sets @ Rs.20/publication 6 publications, 10 sets @ Rs.20/publication to 6.41 lakh villages 3 publications to 4 lakh villages 3 publications to 5.92 lakh villages 2.
SAMETI Infrastructure Rs.1 crore/ SAMETI 30 SAMETIs to be funded Nil Infrastructure support to 30 @ 1 crore each ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA ANNEXURE-VI Government of India Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Extension Division)
******

Training Module on ‘Market Led Extension for Field Functionaries’ (5 days Orientation Programme in MANAGE, NIAM, SAMETIs and EEIs)

Objectives:
 To create awareness on new dimensions of agricultural marketing management among master trainers and officials from agriculture and other line departments  To mainstream Agricultural Marketing Management in extension programs of different departments  To orient on different policy initiatives of the government in the field of Agricultural Marketing Management  To sensitize different field functionaries on Agricultural Marketing systems and processes involved in it  To explore available market linkage opportunities for effective integration of FPOs and its members with market  To orient functionaries of line departments on different technologies and programmes benefiting the farmers, FPOs and other stakeholders in tune with the available marketing opportunities

Orientation Programme on Agricultural Marketing Management for Extension Functionaries Duration :
5 days Number of Participants :
Beneficiaries

:
Officers from agriculture and allied departments, Extension Officers, Subject Matter Specialist, Scientists, Assistant Professors and other equivalent officials serving in Government organizations and involved actively in extension, research and development activities Duration of each session :
90 Minutes including 15 – 20 Minutes discussion

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Session 1: Inauguration - Registration - Address by Important Stakeholders Session 2: APLM Act, 2017- An Introduction - Provisions - Operationalization - Challenges Session 3: Direct Marketing - Models - Success Stories - Challenges Session 4: Contract Farming: PPP in Agricultural Marketing - Success Stories - Model Contract Farming Act 2018 Day-2 Session 5: Farmers Producers Companies: Group Led Development - Success Stories - Social Mobilization - Challenges Session 6: Linking Farmers to Market: Harvesting Benefits for Farmers - Success Stories - Expectation of Retail Sector from FPOs - Challenges Session 7: ICT enabled Agricultural Marketing - Agmarknet - Future Market - Online Marketing - e-Procurement - Agriculture Trade - Challenges with ITC based marketing models Session 8: Grading & Standardization - Legal Provisions - Technology & Mechanization - Challenges Day - 3 – Field Visits Session 9: Exposure visit to e-NAM Mandi Session 10: Exposure visit to Director Market/Rythu Bazar Session 11: Exposure visit to Farmer Producer Companies Session 12: Exposure visit to Processing Units/WDRA Accredited warehouse

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Day - 4 Session 13: Branding & Packaging - Strategies & Technologies - Innovation & Success Stories - Export Management - Challenges Session 14: Warehousing: Taking advantages for better prices - WDRA (Act – 2007)
- Negotiable Warehouse Receipt - Application of technology in warehousing mainly data management like concept of electronic repository - Pledge finance programme - Post-Harvest Management and risk management - Schemes to promote warehousing sector and creation of infrastructure - The concept of warehouses operating as Sub-Market Yard - Challenges in linking farmers with such new models Session 15: Agri Processing - Technologies & Institutions - Programme & incentives - Adoption of Rural Marketing by FPOs Session 16: Developmental Programmes of Agricultural Marketing - Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure Scheme - Prime Minister Fasal Bima Yojana - Minimum Support Price & Market Intervention Scheme Day – 5 Session 17: Market Led Extension - Marketing Systems & Institutions - Marketing Process - Developmental Programmes - Extension Challenges & Remedies Session 18 & 19: Panel Discussion on Pro-Farmer Marketing Strategies - Farmers - FPOs/FPCs - Traders - Marketing Departments - Academicians - Agribusiness Companies Session 20: Valedictory - Feedback from Participants

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA ANNEXURE-VII

Govt. of India Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Extension Division)
****** Training Module on Market Led Extension for Farmers/FPOs (2 days Orientation Programme at SAMETIs and KVKs)

Objectives:
 To create awareness on new dimensions of Agricultural Marketing Management among farmers  To orient on policy different policy initiatives of the government in Agricultural Marketing Management  To sensitize farmers/FPOs on Agricultural Marketing systems and processes involved in it  To explore available market linkage opportunities for effective integration of individual farmers and members of FPOs with market  To orient farmers/FPOs on technologies and programmes benefiting the farmers and FPOs directly in tune with the available market opportunities.

Orientation Programme on Agricultural Marketing Management for Farmers Duration :
2 days Number of Participants :
Beneficiaries :
Farmers, FPOs and members of farmers organizations Duration of each session :
90 Minutes including 15 – 20 Minutes discussion

Day-1 Session 1: Inauguration - Registration - Address by Important Stakeholders Session 2: APLM Act, 2017- An Introduction - Provisions - Operationalization

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA - Challenges

Session 3: Linking Farmers/FPOs to Market: Harvesting Benefits for Farmers - Success Stories - Social Mobilization - Expectation of Retail Sector from FPOs - Challenges Session 4: ICT enables Agricultural Marketing - e-NAM - Agmarknet - Future Market - Online Marketing - e-Procurement - Agriculture Trade Day - 2 Session 5: Grading & Standardization - Legal Provisions - Technology & Mechanization - Strategies & Technologies - Post-Harvest Management and risk management Session 6: Developmental Programmes of Agricultural Marketing - Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure Scheme - Minimum Support Price & Market Intervention Scheme - WDRA - Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana Session 7: Market Led Extension - Marketing Systems & Institutions - Marketing Process - Developmental Programmes - Export Management - Extension Challenges & Remedies Session 8: Valedictory - Feedback from Participants - Address by Important Stakeholders - Distribution of certificates

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA ANNEXURE-VIII FORM GFR 12-C [(See Rule 239)] FORM OF UTILIZATION CERTIFICATE (FOR STATE GOVERNMENTS)
(Where expenditure incurred by Govt. bodies only)

Certified that out of Rs._______ lakh of grants sanctioned during the year ________ in favour of the State Government of ______________________ under E.R. Scheme this Ministry/ Department letter No. & date given in the margin, Rs._______lakh on account of Bank interest accrued and Rs.________ lakh on account of unspent balance of the previous year, a sum of Rs._________ lakh has been utilized for the purpose for which it was sanctioned and balance of Rs._______ lakh remaining un-utilized at the end of the year will be adjusted towards grant- in-aid payable in next year.
2.
Certified that I have satisfied myself that the conditions on which the grants-in-aid was sanctioned have been duly fulfilled/being fulfilled and that I have exercised the following checks to see that the money was actually utilized for the purpose for which it was sanctioned.
3.
Kinds of checks exercised:- i)
Sanction orders of GOI – during the year ______ ii)
UC is issued based on Audited Accounts – during the year ______ iii)
Annual Progress Report – during the year _______

(Signature with Stamp)
Director of Agriculture Department of Agriculture S.
No Letter No. & Date Amount 1.

2.

Total: -

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA ANNEXURE-IX

AUDITED STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURE FOR THE YEAR ………

S.
No.
Implementing Agency/State Unspent Balance as on 1st April_____ Release during the year ________ Expenditure Incurred during the year _____ Closing Balance as on 31st March ______ 1.
SNO, H. Qrs.
SAMETI ATMA…….
ATMA…….
ATMA…….
ATMA…….
ATMA…….
ATMA…….
ATMA…….
-----------

TOTAL

This statement is signed based on audited accounts for the year ………………….

SNO (ATMA)
Directorate of Agriculture, Government of ………………….

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA ANNEXURE-X

ACTIVITY MAPPING FOR PANCHAYATI RAJ INSTITUTIONS

The State Governments may have in place a sound mechanism for involvement of PRIs in the formulation, prioritization of activities & identification of beneficiaries at grass root level and ensure involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions. An illustrative Activity Mapping for involvement of PRI is given below:

Activity Category Union Govt.
(MOA&FW, DA&FW)
State Government District Level Panchayati Raj System District/ Intermediate/ Village Panchayat Framing Sectoral Action Plan Policy Formulation.
Comments of Ministry of PRI suitably incorporated in the policy.
Implement policies formulated by GOI.
Aggregating Sectoral Action Plan into District Action Plan.
PRI institution from village level is involved in preparing the Sectoral Extension Work Plan along with other Stakeholders and farmers.
Preparation of Block Action Plan in consultation with BTT and BFAC.
Selection of Cafeteria activities.
Identification of Beneficiaries - Monitoring of beneficiary identification Identify beneficiaries with active involvement of PRIs for training, demonstration and other farmer-oriented activities.
Identify beneficiaries with active involvement of Farmer Friends for all beneficiary oriented activities under the Scheme.
Conduct of Farm Information Dissemination Activities - - Organization of Exhibitions, Kisan Melas, use of Print & Electronic media, Field Days, Kisan Goshthies etc.
Actively involved in selection of area of specialization, venue, and actual organization.
Monitoring & Evaluation Review of Performance, follow up & feedback.
Review by IDWG in which PRI rep. is a member.
ATMA GB in which CEO, Zila Parishad is a Vice Chairman.
By Farmer Friend, BTM, ATM in association with PRI.

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Annexure XI Summary of Important Farmer Oriented Activities benefiting individual farmers Activity

Details Ceiling of Cost Norms (Max.)
Proposed ceiling for activity Remarks Training of farmers for maximum period of 7days.
a) Inter-State Rs.1500/farmer/day Avg. Rs.60000 per block Avg. 40 farmers days per block b) Within State Rs.1250/farmer/day Avg. Rs.100000 per block Avg. 80 farmers days per block c) Within district Rs.500 RPL based training /farmer/day Avg. Rs.4 lakh per block Avg.800 farmers days per block Demonstrations a) Demonstration (Agri.)
Rs. 6000/ demonstration of 1 acre Avg. Rs.4.80 lakh per block Avg. 80 demonstrations per block b) Demonstration (allied sector)
Rs. 6000/ demonstration Avg. Rs.2.40 lakh per block Avg. 40 demonstrations per block Exposure visit of farmers- maximum duration of 5 days excluding travel time Inter State Rs.1500/farmer/day Avg. Rs.37500 per block Avg. 5 farmer per block for 5 days.
Within the State Rs.1000/farmer/day Avg. Rs.80000 per block Avg. 16 farmer per block for 5 days.
Within District Rs.500/farmer/day Avg. Rs.30000 per block Avg. 60 farmers per block for one day.
Farmer Scientist Interactions District level Rs.30000/ Interaction Rs.90000/ district 3 Interactions per year Farm School Model-I: At Progressive Farmer (PF) Field @Rs. 32,400/- ;
and Model-II: At Awardee Farmer Field @Rs.20,200/- Minimum 5 F.S./block -with 25 trainee farmers/ farm school

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Annexure XII

Concept Note on Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) based Training of Farmers 1.
Background:

Agriculture represent significant and skilled sector in which majority of the cultivation task need higher skills that include land preparation, seed treatment, sowing, fertilizer application, pest management, farm mechanization, irrigation, harvesting, storage, marketing etc. Several cultivation tasks involve intellectual understanding of the package of practices, tools & techniques and process to execute farming practices.

As a matter of fact, farmers are performing field operations from production to marketing of farm produce and skilfully undertaken such activities by virtue of their traditional & scientific knowledge and farming experience. It has often been felt that most of the Indian farmers have only access to traditional knowledge and in most cases there is huge gap in existing knowledge and new skill sets required in modernizing agriculture.

Besides, farmers need to be empowered with latest farming technologies like irrigation systems, mechanization, high yielding varieties, INM and IPM. However application of technology requires up-gradation of knowledge through training and advisory services. This shall be achieved through short-term bridge courses in the priority areas of agriculture and allied sector, which will act as enabler for up- skilling and empowering the farmers.

2.
Vision: To recognize the prior learning and up-skilling of 1.25 crore farmers in next five years for the period from 2021-22 to 2025-26.

3.
Objective:
 To assess the competence of farmers in the structured framework through RPL and up-skilling them to adopt improved farm practices.

4.
Implementation Strategy for RPL:
 ATMA being the Project Implementing Agency at District level to coordinate with KVKs, SAUs, agriculture & allied Departments, District Training Centres and other local bodies to implementing Guidelines for the same will be issued to States to conduct 2 days RPL based bridge training for capacity building of farmers in agriculture and allied areas.
 All farmers including women farmers imparted training under Extension Reforms(ATMA) to undergo five step RPL process (i) Mobilization, (ii) Counselling & pre-screening, (iii) Orientation, (iv) Assessment & (v) Certification.

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA  Each enrolled candidate to undergo following RPL process:
Activity Duration  Domain Training (clarifying any doubts/ gaps a candidate may have with respect to existing farming practices and identifying gaps in adoption of good agricultural practices.
 Soft Skills in domain areas.
 Familiarization with Assessment Process 3-4 hours

 The RPL based bridge trainings are to be conducted by ATMA block level functionaries in coordination with KVKs/SAUs & others stakeholders.
 The provision under RPL would be included in the guidelines of Extension Reforms (ATMA) scheme and the cost norms of ATMA cafeteria for training of farmers shall be applicable for RPL based bridge training.
 Assessment of candidates for RPL and certification may be done through designated agency (NGOs/Pvt. organization etc) identified by ATMA.
 These training are to be coordinated at village level to facilitate their training within the location of village itself.
 Bridge course option in specific areas of maximum 12 hours duration for certification as per list of priority areas. Bridge course may be for any duration but not beyond 12 hours (total maximum period of RPL based bridge training can be 4 + 12 hours = 16 hours).
 Assessment has to be conducted in local language. Special arrangements may be made for assessment and training of candidates who cannot read and write.
 Training Need Assessment/ Training Schedule High quality pictures & videos, training attendance record/ sheets & other documents required for RPL/Skill certification may be captured.
 Any non-compliance to RPL process during mobilization, screening, training, assessment & certification would be placed before the Coordination Committee/Assessment Committee for appropriate action.
5.
Course Curriculum for RPL and Bridge Training of Farmers:
Day-1:
 Capture information of beneficiary farmer for RPL and identify the skill gaps through structured questionnaire.
 Orientation on user friendly mobile software.
 Focused training of farmers on identified gaps with reference to location specific farming technologies.
 Training of farmers in specialized areas in agriculture and allied sectors.

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Day-2:
 Training of farmers in specialized areas in agriculture and allied sectors.
 Feedback and assessment of candidates for certification.
6.
Priority Areas for Training of Farmers in Agriculture & Allied areas are given in Appendix-I and Questionnaire for RPL assessment of farmers is given in Appendix-II.

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Appendix-I

Priority Areas for Training of Farmers in Agriculture & Allied areas

S.
No.
Areas of Training 1.
Quality Seed Grower 2.
Integrated Farming System 3.
Integrated Pest Management 4.
Integrated Nutrient Management 5.
Custom Hiring Service Provider 6.
Tractor Operator/Maintenance and Repair 7.
Organic Farming 8.
Climate Change & Risk Mitigation Manager 9.
Mushroom Grower 10. Makhana Grower 11. Sericulturist 12. Nursery Worker /Seedling Raiser 13. Post-Harvest Management 14. Agri. Marketing /Market Led Extension 15. Spice Crop Cultivator 16. Horticulture/Floriculture Farmer 17. Protected cultivation 18. Medicinal and Aromatic Farming 19. Dairy Farmer/ Milk Processing 20. Goat Farmer/Meat Processing 21. Poultry Farmer 22. Fisheries/Shrimp Farmer /Crab Farmer/ Aquaculture Farmer 23. Beekeeper 24. Agro-processing & Value Addition 25. Pro-women farmer friendly technologies 26. Any other area specific trainings as per requirement

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Appendix-II Questionnaire for Assessment of Farmers for RPL 1. Which are major crops grown (Kharif/Rabi/Summer) in your area?
2. Which crop varieties do you grow in your field?
3. Do you grow horticulture crops in your field? If yes, name the crops.
4. Do you know about Integrated Nutrient Management?
5. Whether you have soil testing report of your land?
6. Do you apply fertilizers in your field as per the doses recommended in soil health card?
7. From where you purchase seeds & fertilizers?
8. Do you know about seed treatment? If yes, how do you do it?
9. How many farm animals (draught/milch animals) do you have?
10.
Which are the sources of irrigation in your village and how do you irrigate the crops?
11.
Which are the major pest & disease on the crop in your area?
12.
Do you know about Integrated Pest Management?
13.
Which fungicides/pesticides do you use for pest/disease control?
14.
How do you harvest your crop? (Mechanical/manually)
15.
Which is the nearest market place for selling of farm produce and knowledge of marketing channels?
16.
Do you know about crop insurance/animal insurance and whether you are availing the insurance facilities?
17.
Is there any storage facilities (godown/warehouse/ cold storage) in your area?
18.
Do you have Kisan Credit Card?
19.
Which are the sources of the information (Kisan Call Center/CSC/KVK etc.)?
20.
Are you a member of any FPO/FIG?
21.
In which topic/training to upgrade your knowledge?
22.
Do you know about MSP of Crops?

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Questionnaire for Cereals / Pulses / Oilseed /Cash crop 1.
How do you perform land preparations for sowing?
2.
Whether you have the soil testing report of your land?
3.
When the sowing is done?
4.
Which crops and varieties are grown in your field?
5.
Do you maintain the spacing and seed rate during sowing of crop?
6.
Which are the major pest & diseases on the crop in your areas?
8.
Do you know about Integrated Pest Management? How do you control the pest/diseases?
9.
How do you control the weeds?
10.
What are sources of Irrigation and how and when it is given?
11.
How do you harvest the crop (mechanical/manual)?
12.
Is there any storage facility in the village?
13.
Which is nearest market place to sell the agriculture produce?
14.
Do you know about crop insurance and its importance during crop failure due to natural calamities?
15. Are you providing advisory services to other farmers on crops production techniques?

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Questionnaire for vegetable Growers:
1.
Which vegetable crops are cultivated in your farm?
2.
How land preparation is done?
3.
Whether soil-testing reports of land are available, how you decide fertilizer dose?
4.
Which varieties of vegetables are grown?
5.
Do you maintain the spacing and seed rate during sowing of crop?
6.
Do you know about Integrated Pest Management? How do you control the pest/diseases?
7.
How do you control the weeds?
8.
What are sources of irrigation and method of irrigation?
9.
When and how harvesting/grading of crop done?
10.
Any storage facility available in village/area?
11.
Nearest Vegetable market?
12.
Any vegetable processing plant nearby village?
13.
Do you know about crop insurance and its importance?
14. Are you providing advisory services to other farmers on vegetable production techniques?

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Questionnaire for Fruit Growers:
1.
Which major fruit crops grown in your farm ?
2.
Whether soil-testing reports of land are available, how you decide fertilizer dose?
3.
How land preparations are done before plantation?
4.
Which varieties of fruits are grown in your farm?
5.
Do you maintain spacing, and plant population in the farm?
6.
Do you know about Integrated Pest Management? How do you control the pest/diseases?
8. Source of irrigation and method of irrigation?
9.
How do you control the weeds?
10.
How and when harvesting of fruits is done?
11.
Is there any cold storage facilities available in area?
12.
Which is the nearest market to sell the produce?
13.
Are you a member of any fruit grower's association?
13.
Do you know crop insurance and its importance in fruit cultivation?
14. Are you providing advisory services to other farmers on fruit production techniques?

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Questionnaire for Dairy Farmers:
1. Which major milch breeds are found in your area?
2. How many dairy animals are available in your farm?
3. What is average milk yield/ day/animal in village?
4. Is there any milk cooperative society in your village?
5.
Do you grow fodder crop to feed the dairy animals?
6.
What are sources of irrigation?
7.
How milking is done and what precautions do you take for clean milk production?
8. How rationing of milch animal done?
9.
How do you maintain the health of milch animals?
10. Where milk is marketed?
11. Is there any milk-processing unit nearby?
12. Which is the nearest place for sale of milk and milk products?
13. Do you know about animal insurance?
14. Are you providing advisory services to other farmers on dairy farming techniques?

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Questionnaire for Beekeeper:
1.
Which are the major crops grown in your area?
2.
Is any existing Beekeeper in your village?
3.
Do you know about Bee keeping?
4.
Which crops are beneficial in beekeeping?
5.
How bee colonies are maintained?
7.
What precautions are required in bee rearing and honey production?
8.
Do you know about the facilities required for honey production?
11.
Whether processing and marketing of honey is available nearby your village?
12.
Have you undergone any training on bee keeping?
13. Are you providing advisory services to other farmers on bee keeping techniques?

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Questionnaire for Sericulture Farmer 1.
Which major crops are cultivated in your area?
2.
Whether soil-testing report of your land is available? How do you decide fertilizer doses for application?
3.
How many farmers in your village is doing Sericulture?
4.
Which varieties of crops they are growing?
6.
Do you know about the techniques for rearing of silk worms?
8.
What precautions are required for silkworm rearing?
9.
How feeding of silkworm is managed?
10.
How Cocoons are harvested, cared and processed?
11.
Which is nearest market for marketing of cocoons?
12.
Is there any registered farmers group of Sericulture?
13. Are you a member of any Sericulture Producer Organization?
14. Are you providing advisory services to other farmers on Sericulture farming techniques ?

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Questionnaire for Mushroom Grower 1.
Do you know about mushroom production technology?
2.
What types of mushroom are grown in your farm?
4.
From where you get the raw material for mushroom production?
5.
Have you attended any trainings on mushroom production? If yes, when and where?
6.
What precautions are required to be taken for mushroom cultivation?
7.
Do you know about nutritional importance of mushroom?
8.
How harvesting, processing and packaging of mushroom is done ?
9.
Which is the nearest place for marketing of mushroom?
10.
Do you produce the bi-products from mushroom?
11.
Do you want to undergo advance training on mushroom cultivation?
12. Are you providing advisory services to other farmers on mushroom production techniques?

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Questionnaire for Poultry Farmer 1. Do you have all the facilities for Poultry farm?
2. Do you know about feed management of poultry feeds?
3. How do you take the precautions and sanitation required for maintaining the Poultry farm?
4. Is there any registered poultry farmers group in your village?
5. How do you manage the packaging material required for marketing?
6. How do you manage the marketing of poultry birds?
7. Have you insured the poultry farm business?
8. Have you undergone any training on poultry farm management?
9. Are you providing advisory services to other farmers on poultry farming techniques?

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Questionnaire for Goat Farmer 1.
Do you know about Goat farming?
2.
Have you undergone training on Goat farming?
3.
Which Goat breeds are available in your Goat Farming?
4.
Do you know about stall feeding/open grazing methods?
5.
Which fodder required for Goat farming?
6.
Do you adopt the health care measures in Goat farming?
7.
Is there any registered farmers group for Goat farming?
8.
Are you aware of Animal health insurance?
9.
Which is nearest place for marketing of Goat?
10.
Which by products you will get in Goat farming?
11. Are you providing advisory services to other farmers on Goat farming techniques?

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA Questionnaire for Fishery Farmer:
1. Do you know about fish farming?
2. Have you undergone any training on Fish farming 3. Is there any pond/source of water in your village?
4. Do you know about farm pond scheme for fish farming?
5. How many farmers in your village are practicing fish farming?
6. Which species of fish have you for fish farming?
7. Do you know about feed management practices in fish farming?
8. Which are the precautionary measures required for fish farming?
9. Is there any registered farmers group in your village for fish farming?
10. What is Importance of fishpond insurance?
11. Which is nearest place for marketing of fisheries?
12. Are you providing advisory services to other farmers on fish production techniques?

ATMA GUIDELINES, 2025 UNDER SMAE OF KRISHONNATI YOJANA S. No.
Registry Fields 1.
Farmer Registry Farmer ID

Farmer Name (English)

Aadhaar number

DoB

Gender

State LGD Code

Farmer’s Mobile Number

Residence Address

Survey Number(s)

Extent(s)

Farm ID(s)

Farmer ID Farmer ID

Flag (calculated S/M/L Farmer)

Any other fields that the state maintains at their discretion 2.
Geo-Referenced Village Maps Farm ID

LGD codes of village/ward

Geo coordinates (of vertices of boundary of the plot)

ULPIN

Farmland plot area

Land use classification

Survey No. / Khasra no. Of parcels

Any other fields that the State maintains at their discretion 3.
Crop Sown Registry Farmer ID

Farm ID

Village LGD Code

Year

Season

Sown area (at farm plot level)

Crop IDs (at Farm plot level)

Crop photos

Geotags (of photo taken)

Geotags of farm boundary where the crop is sown

Sowing /Planting date (at farm plot level)

Irrigation type(at farm plot level)

Any other fields that the state maintains at their discretion)