1 | P a g e RKVY DIVISION DA & FW MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE KRISHI BHAWAN, NEW DELHI– 110001 Operational Guidelines for Innovation and Agri-entrepreneurship programme under RKVY 2023-24 to 2025-26

2 | P a g e

3 | P a g e INDEX Background 2 Vision 3 Objective 4 Expected Outcomes from Innovation and Entrepreneurship Cell 5 Scope of Operational Guidelines 6 Terms of Reference 7 Institutional Structure 7 – 10 Establishment of new KP/RABIs and funding assistance to existing KP/RABI projects 10 – 12 Key components of KP/RABI Projects 12 – 13 Agripreneurship Orientation cum Pre seed stage funding 14 – 15 Seed Stage Funding as grant-in-aid to Startups 15– 16 Selection Process, Deliverables and Monitoring and Programme Flow 15-17 Programme flow for Pre-seed and Seed-stage 18-19 Promotion of Ideas/ Innovation, Technology of students 15 Promoting Women Entrepreneurship 16 Awards and Recognition 17 Monitoring 20-21 General Guidelines 21 –22 Annexures 23– 41

4 | P a g e 1.
Background All over the world, incubators are receiving attention for developing new enterprises in the fields of technology, service, business ideas etc.
in research institutions and universities. The Government of India has taken several initiative to rejuvenate the technology and business development ecosystem in various sectors through its flagship programs. The agriculture sector which, still employs over 50 per cent of the Indian workforce and contributes around 17- 18 percent to the country’s GDP, has its own unique ecosystem and opportunities in the realm of business. Therefore, to specifically cater to the need and modalities for agribusiness promotion, a component for innovation and agri entrepreneurship named as ‘Innovation and Entrepreneurship programme under “Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana”(RKVY) has been launched in 2017-18. Through this initiative, a thrust is given to promote agripreneurship and start-ups.
RKVY supports agribusiness incubation by tapping innovations and technologies for promotion of agri-startups and for venture creation in agriculture.
In this process, incubation facilities and expertise already available with participating academic, technical, management and R&D institutions in the country are utilized on an Individual or collective basis to harness synergies. Agribusiness Incubation is in its early stages in the Indian agricultural landscape.
During the intervening period, RKVY has established 29 Agri Bussiness Incubators for strengthening Agri Startup ecosystem in the country. The scheme has supported more than 1500 Agri Startups with technical and financial assistance so far, while more than 4000 startups are given training for their capacity building.
Though a good number of agribusiness incubators have been started since the first agribusiness incubator by ICRISAT was set up around 2003 in India, yet the success rate of such incubators has not been high. The existing institutional agribusiness incubators have been envisaged to be strengthened on a need basis and new ones to be set up by providing grants-in -aid under the scheme.
Government of India has taken several initiatives to support agri-startups ecosystem across the country such as Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR) has been supporting agri- start- ups under the project “National Agriculture Innovation Fund (NAIF)”.
Atal Innovation Mission is supporting agri-tech based start-ups through the programs “Atal New India Challenges (ANICs) and Atal Incubation Centres (AICs)
– an ecosystem of start-ups and entrepreneurs.
Department of Science and Technology supports Agri entrepreneurs under its NIDHI-PRAYAS scheme.
Department of Biotechnology (DBT) supports agribusiness bio incubators under its Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC) wing, etc.
Apart from this, Small Farmers' Agri-Business Consortium (SFAC)'s Venture Capital Assistance scheme is providing financial support in the form of an interest-free loan to qualifying startup projects. The revamped guidelines for Agri Startups aims to bring various agencies implementing such programs on one platform to generate synergy of efforts.
2.
VISION To build India's premier entrepreneurial and innovation ecosystem by establishing a suitable environment for the development of startup ecosystems that provide long- term economic and societal consequences

5 | P a g e via:
2.1 Policy Simplification:
To minimize complexity and provide a clear understanding of all benefits for agri- startups 2.2 Driving Agricultural Innovation: To be a leading force in driving innovation within the agricultural sector by supporting and nurturing groundbreaking ideas and technologies.
2.3 Entrepreneurial Ecosystem: To create a vibrant and dynamic entrepreneurial ecosystem within agriculture, fostering collaboration, knowledge sharing, and the development of a supportive community.
2.4 Knowledge Transfer: Act as a hub for knowledge transfer, bringing together industry experts, researchers, and entrepreneurs to share insights, best practices, and lessons learned in the agricultural sector.
2.5 Global Impact: Aspire to have a global impact by supporting startups that have the potential to transform the way food is produced, distributed, and consumed, thereby contributing to global food security and environmental sustainability.
3.
OBJECTIVES 3.1 To promote innovation and agri- entrepreneurship by providing technical and financial support and nurturing an incubation ecosystem in the country.
3.2 To nurture potential agripreneurs by providing training cum internship within the incubator and/or with other start-ups to provide them practical, technical and business insights;
3.3 To make agri entrepreneurship as an attractive career option among other available career choices.
3.4 To provide an opportunity for budding agripreneurs/students for venturing into the agribusiness arena as well as for minimizing risks involved in businesses based on innovation;
3.5 To attract and retain a large number of enthusiasts and skilled youth inagriculture;
3.6 To create a value chain of agri startups for incubators.
Design Principles:
Ease of Navigation A well- defined policy architecture by linking incentives to life cycle stages to enable a startup to seamlessly find relevant incentives.
Similar approach is followed for other ecosystem participants- incubators, investors, and academic institutions.
Incentive Simplification Minimized complexity and provide a clear understanding of policy benefits for all start-ups.
Efficient Disbursal ‘One Stop Shop’ mechanism to ensure timely and efficient benefit transfer through Auto Disbursal.
Seamless Transition Define processes clearly to ensure a smooth transition for any charges in existing incentives and addition of new incentives.

6 | P a g e 4.
EXPECTED OUTCOMES FOR “INNOVATION & ENTREPRENEURSHIP PROOGRAMME” UNDER RKVY 4.1 More than 3500 agri start-ups to be trained and incubated during the scheme period 4.2 2000 – 2200 agri start-ups to be selected and funded during the scheme period 4.3 To develop & strengthen agripreneurship ecosystem in the country 5.
SCOPE OF OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES 5.1 Operative Period: The guidelines shall come into effect from the date of issuance of this order and shall remain in force until the subsequent policy is notified.
5.2 Eligibility for the Policy: The policy shall apply to Startups registered under RKVY – RAFTAAR program, academic institute, incubator and others as defined in the Policy.
6.
TERMS OF REFERENCE 6.1 Agri Start-up: An Agri Start-up is a startup working in agri and allied areas, should fulfill criteria as per the Start-up definition related Notification issued from time to time, by the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DPIIT), Ministry of Commerce, Government of India.
6.2 Knowledge Partner (KP): A Knowledge Partner is a Centre of Excellence and an already established incubator, which will provide handholding and startup evaluation related support to allotted RABIs.
6.3 RKVY Agri Business Incubator (RABI): An RKVY Agri Business Incubator is an incubator which implements agripreneurship orientation cum pre seed stage and Seed stage funding programs of RKVY Innovation and Entrepreneurship programme of RKVY.
6.4 Agripreneurship orientation cum Pre seed stage funding:
A component of the cell’s operations for incubation of start-ups by RABIs and KPs where the founder of an idea/PoC/Protype will be supported with 10,000 INR internship stipend during the training of one month and further grant-in-aid support of upto Rs. 5 Lakhs to selected start-ups if found suitable for pre seed stage.
6.5 Seed Stage Funding: A component of the cell’s operations for incubation of start-ups by RABIs and KPs where a grant-in-aid support of upto Rs. 25 Lakhs to MVP (Minimum Viable Product)
Stage startups.
6.6 MVP stage startup: A start-up which has a product ready and may be launched in the market before testing and validation.

7 | P a g e 6.7 Innovation:
From the agricultural perspective, the innovation may be radical or incremental displaying at product, process or business model at regional level.
6.8 Central Nodal Agency (CNA): An Agency will be nominated by DA&FW as per the DoE guidelines as CNA/SNA for the release of funds to all KP/RABI.
6.9 Selection cum Investment Committee (SIC): This is a committee of domain area experts formed at the K.P. Level which will be responsible to select start ups for funding under the program.
7.
Institutional Structure:
7.1 Innovation and Entrepreneurship programme of RKVY in DA & FW: RKVY Division, DA&FW will be the nodal Department for overall implementation and monitoring of the Innovation and Entrepreneurship program and providing administrative support for its execution. The roles and responsibilities of the Nodal Department will be as:
 Providing funds to existing RKVY Agribusiness Incubators (RABIs) and Knowledge Partners (KPs)
for executing key components of their projects/programms.
The list of existing KP and R-ABI is at Annexure.
 Establishing new RABIs/KPs as and when required.
 Assisting RABIs/KPs for liasoning with other stakeholders .
 Reviewing and monitoring the performance of RABIs/KPs.
 Time-to-time revision in the guidelines as per the needs.
 Setting up of centralised MIS portal for data management and monitoring of the programme.
7.2 Knowledge Partners (KPs):
The Knowledge Partners operate as a middle level unit providing knowledge and assistance to designated RABIs. A KP will also act as a RABI for operating three components of the program and fulfill roles and responsibilities as mentioned in para 7.3. The roles and responsibilities of KPs will be:
 Offering contextual and customized solutions to RABIs  Capacity building and handholding of RABIs assigned to respective KP for smooth running of the program along with the development of agri entrepreneurial ecosystem.
 To Assist SIC for fund recommendation to agristart-ups of RABIs/KPs.
 To represent in the RICs of RABIs.
 To execute the Agri Orientation Programme (AOP)
and Agri- entrepreneurship Incubation (AIP)
programme annually on time.
 To assist agri-startups in scaling up their business and operations, need-based marketing, networking, technology validation support to agri start-ups.
 Conducting ten days masterclass series for RABI start-ups that are funded under the program.
 To build a vibrant agri-startup ecosystem by establishing a network between academia, financial instittutions, industries, mentors, investors, venture capital and other related institutions;

8 | P a g e  Conducting workshops /awareness programme/ award competitions for agri-startups/ capacity building programme of agri-startups/ events/ conclave/ seminars, investors and business meet, etc from time to time.
 Publication of half yearly progress report/newsletter, success stories of agristartups, etc  To monitor the performances of already supported agri-startups under the programme.
 To assist RKVY Division, DA&FW for implementation and monitoring of the programme.
7.3 RKVY Agribusiness Incubators (R-ABIs):
RABIs would act at the implementing level for training, incubation and providing grant -in-aid support to agri start-ups. The roles and responsibilities are:
 To train and nurture agri start-ups under the program;
 To provide grant-in-aid support to selected agri start-ups;
 To assist agri-startups in scaling up their business and operations, need-based marketing, networking, technology validation support to agri start-ups;
 To assist agri startups for raising further funding;
 To build a vibrant agri-startup ecosystem by establishing a network between academia, financial instittutions, industries, mentors, investors, venture capital and other related institutions;
 To execute the Agri Orientation Programme (AOP)
and Agri- entrepreneurship Incubation Programme (AIP) annually on time.
 To conduct workshops /awareness programme/ activities/ award competitions for agri-startups/ capacity building programme of agri-startups/ events/conclave/seminars, investors and business meet, etc from time to time.
 To monitor the performances of already supported agri-startups under the programme.
 Publication of half yearly progress report /newsletter, success stories of agristartups, etc  To conduct and supervise day to day activities of the programme.
 To assist RKVY Division, DA&FW for implementation and monitoring of the programme.
Operating & Maintaining Digital & Physical Infrastructure The Government will use the fund to set up facilities such as cloud storage, APIs, payment platforms, SMS and email services. The eligible start-ups are also provided space in government owned incubation centers, plug and play facilities, co-working spaces, laboratories and testing labs.
The details of all facilities are provided in Section 8.
7.4 Startups Selection and Investment Committee (SIC):
The SIC will be constituted under the chairmanship of expert of Startup industry expert comprising of 5-7 domain experts and a few co-opted members (as per their expertise) at the level of KP.

9 | P a g e The roles and responsibility of SIC are as follows:
 To select agri startups of R-ABIs and KPs for providing grant-in-aid support;
 To decide about the quantum of grant-in- aid support to each agri startup;
 To decide the category for the agri startups under the two funding categories i.e pre seed and seed stage of the Program;
 Setting up and review the milestones of agri startups and release of next instalment if found satisfactory;
 To Decide about any other issues/ course correction related to funded startups including idea pivoting.
 The approval of the proposed SIC committee members will be done by DA & FW based on their profile and relevance  The members of the SIC will be chosen on two year rotation basis or as found suitable by DA & FW  The decision of the SIC will be final with respect to the selection of the startups for different stages of the funding.
 Minimum Corum of 5 members of SIC committee will be required for conducting SIC meeting.
Selection and Investment Committee S.
No.
Experts Role Startup Industry or Academician Chairman 2 – 3 Agri Expert-Industry (1 – 2 nos)
Member 4 – 5 Agri Expert- Academia (1 – 2 nos)
Member Agri sector VC/AIFs/Banks Member DA&FW nominee Member Nominee from the State Government Member PI of the Knowledge Partner (KP)
Member Secretary

10 | P a g e 7.5 RKVY Incubation Committee (RIC): The RIC will be constituted under the chairmanship of the head of institute comprising of 5 members and a few co- opted members (as per their expertise).
The role and responsibilities of RIC are as follows:
 To Select innovative agri startups after initial screening by the incubator team for due diligence cum one month training program and to recommend for SIC.
 Minimum corum of 5 members of RIC committee will be required for conducting RIC meeting.
 The responsibility of efficient operation and management of the program lies with PI of the KP/RABI.
 The Item wise indicative Annual Budget allocation of KP/R-ABI for day to day operation of the program is given at Annexure I.
8.
Establishment of new KP/RABI and funding assistance to existing KP/RABI projects:
Under this scheme, new KP/R-ABIs will be established and existing agribusiness incubators strengthened with need based infrastructure, equipment and manpower.
The Nodal Division/CNA is bestowed with the responsibility of Providing funds to existing RKVY Agribusiness Incubators (RABIs) and Knowledge Partners (KPs) for executing key components of their projects as well as establishing new RABIs/KPs as and when required.
8.1 The details for providing funds to existing RKVY Agribusiness Incubators (RABIs)
and Knowledge Partners (KPs) are given below:
RABI Incubation Committee (RIC)
S. No.
Experts Role Head of the institute Chairman Representative of a bank / VC (having experience of startup funding)
Member 3 – 4 Domain expert (at least one from Industry and at least one from academia)
Member PI of Knowledge Partner (KP) or COO/BM Member PI of the R-ABI project or COO/BM Member Secretary

11 | P a g e  Existing KPs/RABIs will be provided recurring grant and startup funding in four instalments for conducting the activities as per DoE’s instructions.
 The Nodal Division/CNA will ensure timely release of funds through designated CNA/SNA for the Programme.
Annual sanction will be granted on the basis of the targets fixed in the beginning of the financial year.
8.2 The details for establishing new RKVY Agribusiness Incubators (RABIs)
and Knowledge Partners (KPs) are given below:
 Proposals will be invited /submitted from the eligible publicly funded existing Agribusiness Incubators or new incubators to Nodal Division RKVY in DA&FW through advertisements in newspapers and websites.
 The Proposal in the prescribed proforma available at Annexure II, III and IV of Scheme Guidelines (also at http://www.agricoop.nic.in) along with the necessary enclosures will be submitted by the Head of the Host Institute on the Portal of RKVY.
 Nodal Division may circulate the proposal to SIC / expert institutions/ respective KP and R-ABI of the concerned State for examining the proposal and obtaining valuable comments for feasibility of establishing a new KP/R-ABI.
 Eligibility for submitting proposal for RABIs:
• Public funded Academic/ Technical/R&D institutions/organizations/universites/Stat e Agriculture University(s)
(SAUs)/ IITs/IIMs [called Host Institution (HI)]/ public funded organizations having section 08 company/society working in Agriculture & Allied sectors and engaged in promotion of innovation, technology development & commercialization with a proven track record in promotion of agri/rural- technology based enterprises would be eligible to apply.
• The Host Institution is required to have adequate expertise and infrastructure to support innovation and agri- incubation/business activity. A minimum of 5,000 sq. ft. built up space (including existing incubation space)is required for hosting the R-ABI.
• The R-ABI has to set up as a “not for profit” section 8 company or a Society/Trust or an existing Society/Section company dedicated to business incubation and has to have a separate account for funding under RKVY scheme.
• To set up new R-ABI, the eligible public funded institutions as stated above should have a proven track record of promotion of innovative/technology based entrepreneur ship in agri-business.
• A Pure R&D proposal for academic pursuits and industrial consultancy will not be eligible for support.
• The proposals which are not complete or do not meet eligibility criteria will not be considered.
8.3 Eligibility for submitting the proposal for KP:
 In addition to the eligibility requirements mentioned RABI, the existing agribusiness incubators should have adequate expertise and infrastructure to support incubation activity at national level for promoting innovation in agribusiness and handhold other incubators for becoming a KP.

12 | P a g e 8.4 Selection of RABI/KPs:
 As and when the proposals are invited for the establishment of new RABIs and/or KPs, the Nodal Division will constitute a committee under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary (RKVY) involving 3-5 renowned members from the agri entrepreneurial ecosystem. The committee will evaluate the proposals submitted on FMS and approve thereof.
 Nodal Division may also assign the proposal to SIC / expert institutions, KP/R- ABI, etc forexamining and obtaining valuable comments for feasibility of establishing a new KP/R-ABI.
 The newly selected RABIs and KPs will be provided with an initial capital funds assistance for setting up a new infrastructure or upgrading the existing infrastructure and recurring fund.
9.
Key components of KP/RABI Projects:
The KP/RABI will have a larger mandate of supporting and nurturing the agri startups and overall development of the agripreneurial ecosystem in India.
9.1 The KP/RABIs will operate under the identified focus areas as per their technical strength. The suggested focus areas include but are not limited to the following:
Agri-Biotech;
Agriculture, Horticulture, Natural Resource Management; Sustainable Agriculture, Organic farming;
Animal Husbandry, Dairying, Fishery;
Agri-Input tools and technologies, Micro Irrigation, Farm Mechanisation and Agri Engineering, Precision Farming; Harvesting and Post- Harvest Processing; Food Processing; Supply Chain Management, Farm Retailing; Agri Extension Education; Internet of Things (IoT) , ICT and Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture;Waste to Wealth, Secondary Agriculture; Agri Clinics & Farm Health services, etc.
9.2 The KP/RABIs will be required to hire manpower (on contractual basis) for its proper day to day operation and management as well as for putting in place the requisite physical infrastructure (shared/specific) such as laboratory and workshop facilities, utilities, support services, incubation services, networking, mentoring and other facilities within the agreed timelines during sanction of the project for capital and operational funds.
9.3 The KP/RABIs would constitute a selection committee for the selection of the contractual project staff.
9.4 Every R-ABI/KP should frame its own exit policy. However, general guidelines may be as follows:
 An incubated company will leave the incubator on completion of the stipulated period of stay unless extended.
 Under-performance or non-viability of the business proposition as decided by SIC on a case-to-case basis.
 When the company enters in an acquisition, merger or amalgamation deal or reorganisation deal resulting in a substantial change in the profile of the company, its promoters, directors, shareholders, products or business plans,or when a company plans for a public issue.
 Change in promoters'/ founders' team without the concurrence of RABI/KP.
 Any other reasons due to which the SIC may find it necessary for an incubatee company to exit the R-ABI.
 Not withstanding anything written elsewhere, RABI/KP’s decision in connection with the exit of an incubatee company shall be final and shall not be

13 | P a g e disputed by any incubatee company.
9.5 Along with their own incubation programme, KP/RABI will participate in innovation programmes organized/ launched centrally by the Nodal Division of RKVY, DA&FW.
9.6 Each of the R-ABIs would constitute a RABI Incubation Committee (RIC) having experts who can evaluate the prospective incubatee under the Programme as described at point no. 7.5.
9.7 Each RABI/KP is required to have a web- site of its own and should update it on a regular basis.
9.8 RABI/KP will facilitate market access to the incubatees.
9.9 RABI/KP will also organize from time to time a Demo Day to show case mature products of the incubators to investors for facilitation of funding toincubatees.
9.10 Deliverables and Outcomes:
The R-ABI/KP should generate the following deliverables annually to achieve the project objectives:
RABI KP 20-25 Agribusinesses (pre seed + seed)
to be incubated (with funds recommendation)
in agriculture & allied sectors.
40-45 Agri businesses (pre seed + seed) to be incubated (with funds recommendation)
in agriculture & allied sectors.
A minimum Agripreneurs (pre seed + seed) for training for the one-month period including AOP A minimum of 40 Agripreneurs (pre seed + seed) for training for the one -month period including AOP.
The above targets may be revised by DA&FW if found necessary from time to time.
9.11 Sustainability:
The objective of this component is to create infrastructure and other facilities for running an Agribusiness Incubator.
Therefore, keeping in mind the sustainability of the project, KP/R-ABI should develop an action plan for ensuring sustainability, through the following ways:
 Grants from other schemes  Equity in incubated enterprises based on the recommendation of SIC 9.12 Pattern of Funding Support and Release of Funds to KP and R-ABI:
10.12.1 Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare will release funds to the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) in four equal instalments of 25% each.
10.12.2 The release of funds will be done be done by CNA in a consolidated manner for KPs/ RABIs as per requirements.
10.12.3 Each instalment will be released based on the prescribed criteria of the bank balance position available in the dedicated separate bank account of respective KP or R-ABI under the programme.
10.12.4 The KP/ RABIs will be free to utilize this amount in any of the approved component of already sanctioned component as per the requirement 10.12.5 The final audited UCs will be submitted after the completion of the financial year as per the GFR norms.
Agripreneurship Orientation cum Pre seed stage funding The R-ABI shall execute an

14 | P a g e Agripreneurship orientation cum pre seed stage funding program. This program is aimed at providing an opportunity to students/youth and others to work on their ideas by imparting the training cum hands on internship at the respective R-ABI/KP.
Guided by incubator team and/or experienced and innovative startups, they will be able to understand business concepts/ strategy and practical insights of specific industries or markets, challenges and strategies to resolve them.
11.1 Eligibility Criteria 11.1.1 The applicant should fulfil the eligibility based upon the criteria given in 6.6 and innovation as per 6.7.
11.1.2 Enrolled incubatees (before the release of funds)should fulfil the criteria as per the Start up Definition as per the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DPIIT) notifications from time to time.
11.1.3 Enrolled incubatees (Pre-Seed Stage)
should have an business idea to develop a product or a service with market fit/PoC/Prototype before funds recommendation from SIC and before signing of the MoU with the concerned RABI/KP.
11.1.4 The R-ABI/KP should execute an appropriate agreement with the incubate.
11.2 Pattern of Funding Support and Release of Funds for pre-seed stage startups 11.2.1 Each selected startup will be provided with a maximum limit of Rs. 5 lakh as a grant-in-aid under the scheme in one instalment based on the recommendation of SIC.The pre-seed fund will be released to each eligible and selected agri-startups through their respective KP/R-ABI.
11.2.2 Start-ups already receiving grants /financial support from any other Government source for the same project/product/activity will not be eligible under RKVY for grant-in-aid support.
11.2.3 For ensuring incubatee/ private participation in the programme, percent of the funds recommended /sanctioned will be borne by the incubatee .
11.2.4 Under the Agrprenureship Orientation Programme (AOP), a stipend of Rs 10,000 will be granted to the interns for one month.
11.2.5 The list of Resource Person hired by KPs/R-ABIs will be uploaded on the portal.
11.2.6 Under the Pre-seed stage funding subcomponent, maximum of 10-12 startups per R-ABI and a maximum of 20 -25 startups per KP will be undertaken annually.
11.2.7 The full funds of the sanctioned project for pre seed support will be released after the signing of the agreement between the incubator ( RABI/KP) and the incubatee.
11.2.8 After completion of the milestones/project, a CA certified UC along with UDIN and other documents, expenditure statement, and milestones achievement report has to be submitted by the incubatee. NOC and certificate of successful completion of the incubation program will be given by the RABI/KP.
Non-compliance of the above will result in debarment of the startup from participating in any component of RKVY.

15 | P a g e Seed Stage Funding as grant-in- aid to Startups:
A financial assistance of a maximum of Rs.
lakhs will be granted to potential startups. It will assist the incubatees to launch their products/ services/ business platforms etc. into the market or attain business viability at a faster pace.
12.1 Objectives:
12.1.1 To ensure timely seed funds support to selected incubatees through respective RABI/KP.
12.1.2 To enable the translation of minimum viable product (MVP) to the marketable stage of the product business.
12.1.3 To provide a platform of startup ecosystem and refinement of products/ businesses/ services/ innovative solutions for promotingagr-startups.
12.2 Eligiblity criteria:
12.2.1 Incubatees of R-ABI/KP will be eligible for this funding on the basis of consistent performance evaluated by SIC.
12.2.2 The recipient should be a registered legal entity in India with a minimum of two months of residency at the R-ABI/KP.
12.2.3 The recipient has to be an Indian startup as per notification of DPIIT from time to time.
This support is not meant for Indian Subsidiaries of MNC/foreign companies.
12.2.4 Start-ups must have a minimum viable product/ business or a service with market fit, viable commercialization and scope of scaling 12.2.5 Start-ups should be using innovation/regional outreach in its core products or service or business model.
12.3 Broad Activities to be supported under Seed Stage Funding:
Expenses for the following broad activities would be supported under this program as approved by SIC:
12.3.1 Product Refinement/Testing and Trials/ Test Marketing/ Marketinglaunch 12.3.2 Expenses on Data generation/data acquisition 12.3.3 Fees for IP issues/one-time technology licensing fees 12.3.4 Manpower for day today operations 12.3.5 Any other area/activity as deemed necessary and recommended by the SIC 12.4 Pattern of Funding Support and Release of Funds for seed stage startups:
12.4.1A maximum of 10-12 startups per R-ABI and a maximum of 20-25 startups per KP annually will be supported under the seed stage funding component. Each selected startup will be provided with a maximum limit of Rs. 25 Lakhs as grant-in-aid in two instalments (50:50). The seed stage fund will be released to each eligible and selected agri-startup through their respective KP/R-ABI.
12.4.2The first instalment of 50 % of the sanctioned project cost for seed support will be released based on the recommendation of SIC and after the signing of the agreement between the incubator/ RABI/KP and the incubatee.
12.4.3The second instalment of 50% will be released to the incubatee after completion of the milestones as mandated by SIC, submission of the CA certified UC, expenditure statement, milestone achievement reportand other documents and subsequent approval from the RABI/KP.
12.4.4After getting recommendation from SIC, the selected seed stageincubattee will be given an incubationProgramme for a period of 15 days/as per the suggestion of

16 | P a g e SIC before disbursal of the first instalment.
12.4.5For ensuring incubatee in the programme, 15 percent on proportionate basis of the project cost will be borne by the incubatee. The remaining 85 percent of the project cost on proportionate basis upto a maximum of INR 25 lakhs will be borne under the Innovation and Agri- entrepreneurship programme of RKVY scheme.
12.4.6 CA certified UC of previous financial year shall be required for subsequent release of fund in the current year.
12.4.7 The final audited Utilization Certificate (UC) as per GFR norms and expenditure statement and milestones progress achievement report will be submitted by the startup grantee after completion of the project/ milestones.
Non- compliance of the above will result in debarment of the startup from participating in any component of RKVY.
Roles and Responsibilities of CNA:
Central Nodal Agency will be created for fund flow management and disbursal of funds to respective KP/R-ABI in seamless way.
The indicative activities are expected to be conducted by CNA are given below:
 Fund flow management and documentation  Coordination with Nodal Division and respective KP/R-ABI  Data compilation  Monitoring of bank balance and account of respective KP/R-ABI  National level capacity building workshops with Incubators / KP / R-ABI, etc.
13. Selection Process, deliverables and monitoring:
13.1 A centralized call of applications will be announced by the nodal division on its website and FMS Portal .The same will be widely published by the RABI/KPs on their websites and through other channels.
13.2 All applicants for this programme will apply as per the prescribed format on the centralized portal by selecting a maximum of two RABIs at a time.
13.3.
An applicant can apply for any one component i.e. pre seed or seed funding at a time depending upon their stage of development and eligibility criteria.
13.4.
During the selection process, KP/R-ABI will take into consideration any other grant-in-aid funding received by the incubatee for the same activity/ product from other GOI ministries/ offices. A self- declaration from the incubatee about such funding will be mandatory. In case the self declaration is found to be wrong at any stage, it will disqualify the startup from the programme and penal action can also be taken against them. There should be appropriate clause in the MoU to be signed with KP/R-ABI.
13.5.
The KP/RABI may conduct initial screening at their level before presenting the cases to RIC. Preference should be given to start-ups creating innovative solutions in Agriculture and their outreach/impact to farmers and existing system of Agriculture.
13.6.
The startups under the guidance of KP/RABIs will make realistic and achievable milestones 13.7.
SIC will further evaluate and recommend the Startup for quantum of funds including the milestones.
13.8.
The KP/RABI would execute a legal agreement with the incubatee who is selected for the pre seed or seed support and this agreement should be signed

17 | P a g e before the release of the first instalment to the incubatee.
The terms and conditions of agreement with the incubates start up must be clearly detailed and to be framed by the KP/RABI as per the recommendation of SIC, linking with the progress, milestones, monitoring norms etc.
13.9.
Power of sanction order for startups is delegated to KP/RABI as per the recommendation of SIC.
13.10. Time line will be around six month for pre-seed stage programme and around 1 year for seed stage funding programme.

18 | P a g e 14.
Programme Flow for Pre-seed and Seed stage Startups.
Table-I Table-I- Number of start-ups to be supported in each year Sl.No.
Categories Maximum number of start-ups to be supported in each financial year Maximum time period for training and selection Pre-seed stage Seed stage Knowledge Partners (KPs)
20-25 20-25 6 months RKVY- Agribusiness 10-12 10-12 6 months Call of Application on Central Portal or KP/ RABI Portal  15 days incubation workshop Pre – screening of applicants by KPs/ RABIs for initial training

19 | P a g e Incubators Table-II- Grant-in-aid support to start-ups Sl.No.
Categories Grant-in –aid support to each selected beneficiary Maximum time period for funding and utilization of grant (after selection)
Pre-Seed stage Funding Upto 5 lakh 6 months Seed stage Funding Upto 25 lakh 12 months

20 | P a g e 15. Promotion of ideas/ innovation/ technology of students:
15.1 The agri-business ideas/ innovation and entrepreneurship related activities in agriculture and allied sectors of students will be supported to transform the idea into a real business, products and technologies.
Each selected student will be supported with technical and financial assistance of upto 4 lakh as one time fund for promoting their business ideas through KPs and R-ABIs appointed under the programme. The grant-in –aid support will be released based on the recommendation of SIC. A maximum of students per KP/R-ABI will be supported during each financial year.
Students need not be registered as startups as per DPIIT guidelines.
15.2 The programme will be promoting students’ driven innovations & start- ups and to engage the students in innovation and start up activities to encourage the potential creativity of students in problem solving and entrepreneurial mind-set, and connecting with different stakeholders at regional, national and international level.
15.3 The activity will be implemented by KPs and R-ABIs in coordination with various organizations such as Central Agricultural Universities (CAUs)/ State Agricultural Universities (SAUs)/ Agricultural Departments of States & UTs governments/AICTE, UGC affiliated universities/Institutions/Colleges/ organizations/Scientific & research organizations, etc.
16.
Promoting Women entrepreneurship:
16.1 Startups having more than 50% equity with women founder belonging to rural areas shall be eligible to receive upto 10% additional financial assistance as part of seed stage funding. Women entrepreneurship will be strengthened under the programme.
17.
Awards and Recognition In order to enhance motivation levels among incubators and to recognize the good work done, Innovation & Entrepreneurship Cell will institute a National Award for the best KP/RABI. All R -ABIs under this scheme will be eligible to apply for the award. The award will carry a cash prize of Rs. 2 lakhs, a trophy and a certificate every year till the end of the project.The incubator to be awarded will be selected by the Committee constituted by DA &Fw based on its performance in various spheres including nurturing Agribusiness entrepreneurship, innovation etc.
KP/RABIs in turn will also institute awards for the best incubatees and a cash prize of Rs.2 lakh, a trophy and a certificate will be awarded every year till the end of theproject. The selection of the starup for this award will be done by the respective SIC formed for each KP.
18.
Monitoring Day to day functioning of the Program and regular monitoring of the progress of the startups will be responsibility of respective KP/RABI. The Nodal Division, DA&FW will monitor the program implementation and its impact on six monthly basis. The review & monitoring may include presentation by the RABI/KPs of the annual progress report and utilization certificate.
They will also submit a consolidated annual progress report along with the audited account details to Nodal Division,DA&FW.
RABI/KPs will be expected to upload their progress on their website on a regular basis.
The details of manpower/ resource person to be hired for startup cell of DA&FW for

21 | P a g e implementation and monitoring of the Innovation and Agri-entrepreneurship program and for operation of KP/R-ABI is at Annexure VI.
19.
General Guidelines 19.1 The purpose of this document is to provide information to interested applicants for the scheme.
It is neither an agreement nor an offer made by RKVY.
19.2 The issue of these guidelines does not imply that RKVY is bound to select an applicant for becoming a KP/RABI. DA & FW reserves the right to accept/ reject any or all of applications submitted in response to the document at any stage without assigning any reasons what so ever.
19.3 The decision of DA & FW will be final and no explanation or justification for any aspect of the selection processs shall be given with respect to KP/RABI selection.
19.4 Applicants shall bear all costs associated with the preparation and submission of the applications and the participation in the selection process of KP/RABI.
19.5 As per the latest instruction by Controller General of Accounts (CGA), Government of India, the Host Institution is required to register at CGA website (http://xxxxs.nic.in) to facilitate release of funds.
19.6 The grant being released should be exclusively spent on the specified purpose for which it has been sanctioned within the stipulated time.
Any unspent balance out of the amount sanctioned would be either adjusted towards the grants-in-aid payable during the next year or refunded to the Govt.of India by means of an Account Payee Demand Draft drawn in favour of the Drawing and Disbursing Officer RKVY, payable at New Delhi.
19.7 The R-ABI will maintain separate audited accounts for the grant released under this scheme.
The interest earned should be reported to the DA&FW. The interest thus earned will be treated as a credit to the organization to be adjusted towards further instalments of the grant, if any.
19.8 The HI is required to upload i)
progress report;
ii)
Utilization Certificate; iii) Audited statement of accounts on the FMS portal after the end of each financial year.
19.9 The operations of the KP/R-ABI will be reviewed half yearly based on a comparison of the funds allocated vs the actual expenditure and physical performance.The release of grants after initial two years and each subsequent year will be based on satisfactory performance as per the pre defined criteria defined by DA & FW.
19.10 Concerned officers of Nodal Division, DA&FW or its authorized representatives may visit the KP/R- ABI periodically for ascertaining the progress of work and resolving any difficulties that might be encountered in the course of implementation.
19.11 All the assets acquired or created from the grant shall be installed in the premises of the KP/R-ABI and not in any other department/Division of the Host Institute, unless specifically approved by DA&FW.
19.12 Nodal Division, DA&FW reserves the right to terminate support to the project at any stage, if it is convinced that the grant is not being utilized properly or that appropriate progress in the project work is not being made after giving due chance of representation to the RABI. In such an eventuality, the Nodal Division DA&FW shall be free to make deductions from funds available with theKP/R-ABI.

22 | P a g e 19.13 All the assets acquired or created from the grant should not be disposed-of orencumbered or utilised for purpose other than those for which the grant has been sanctioned without the prior permission of the Nodal Division,DA&FW.
19.14 DA&FW at its discretion shall have the right to access the books of account for the grant received from the GoI. It is also free to get the auditing done through C&AG.
19.15 The HI must not entrust the implementation of the work for which the grant isbeing sanctioned to another institution and divert the grant receipts as assistance to the latterinstitution.
19.16 The manpower employed by the KP/R -ABI will be the liability of the KP/R- ABI and Nodal Division,DA&FW will not have any liability towards them.
19.17 The Nodal Division, DA&FW will have no responsibility in case of any losscaused to life or property due to accident, fire or any other reasons. The HI isrequired to take appropriate safety and insurance measures to safeguard against any loss to human life and property related to theR-ABI.
19.18 Nodal Division,DA&FW,will have no liability on account of any omission or commission o fregulatory/statutory requirement by the KP/R-ABI or its incubates and the companies.
19.19 Format for application for seed stage funding and idea / pre-seed stage funding will be devised in association with Knowledge Partners and R-ABIs as per requirement.
19.20 Based on experience of operating the scheme, DA&FW reserves the right to revise the guidelines from time to time.
19.21 The audited UC and progress report will be uploaded by the KPs and RABIs on the FMS portalafter the completion of the respective financial year.
19.22 The audited UC and milestone completion report will be uploaded by the startups on the FMS portal which will be verified and approved by the respective RABI/KP.
19.23 Any dispute between the Incubator and Incubatee will be settled by the the respective RIC of KP and R-ABI itself or this will be setlled in the court of the concerned State/UTs of the respective KP/R-ABI.

23 | P a g e Annexure The list of 5 Knowledge Partners (KPs) and 24 R-ABIs RKVY- Agribusiness Incubators (R-ABIs)
from across the country appointed by DA & FW for for implementation assistance and encouraging start-ups are as follows:
20.
5 Knowledge Partners (KPs):
1.
National Institute of Agricultural Extension Management (MANAGE), Hyderabad 2.
National Institute of Agricultural Marketing(NIAM) Jaipur, 3.
Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI) Pusa, New Delhi, 4.
University of Agriculture Science , Dharwad, Karnataka and 5.
Assam Agriculture University, Jorhat, Assam 21.
24 RKVY-RAFTAAR Agribusiness Incubators (R-ABIs):
1.
Chaudhary Charan Singh University, Hisar, Haryana 2.
CSK Himachal Pradesh KrishiVishvavidyalaya, Palampur, Himachal Pradesh 3.
IIT-BHU, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 4.
Jawaharlal Nehru KrishiVishwaVidyalaya, Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh 5.
ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh 6.
Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, Punjab 7.
Indira Gandhi KrishiVishwavidyalaya, Raipur, Chhattisgarh 8.
Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agricultural Sciences and Technology, Jammu,J&K 9.
IIM, Kashipur, Uttarakhand 10. Kerala Agricultural University, Thrissur, Kerala 11. ICAR-Indian Institute of Millets Research, Hyderabad, Telangana 12. Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU), Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu 13. Agri innovation and entrepreneurship cell, ANGRAU, Andhra Pradesh 14. National Rice Research Institute, Cuttack, Odisha 15. S K N Agriculture University, Jobner, Rajasthan 16. Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, West Bengal 17. Bihar Agricultural University, Bhagalpur, Bihar 18. Anand Agricultural University, Anand, Gujarat 19. ICAR-Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, Mumbai, Maharashtra 20. Dr.PanjabraoDeshmukhKrishiVidyapeeth, Akola, Maharashtra 21. ICAR-NIVEDI, Bengaluru, Karnataka 22. College of Fisheries, Lembucherra, Tripura 23. Veterinary Medicine College of Veterinary Sciences &Animal Husbandry, Mizoram 24. College of Horticulture & Forestry, Pasighat, Arunachal Pradesh.

24 | P a g e Annexure-I Annual Budget details Annual Budget Guidelines for Existing R-ABI Sl.
Item of Expenditure* Project Cost (in lakhs)
No.
Recurring I.
Manpower* (Core Management Team / Mentors and Tech Support Persons / Business Development Professionals, etc.)
33.6 II.
Travel 3.2 III.
Utility and maintenance 1.7 IV.
Marketing, networking & publicity V.
Training Programmes, Events, and Seminar, workshops, startup meets, awareness camps/ meetings etc.
VI.
Stipend to agripreneurs @ INR 10,000/ for a monthif conducted in offline mode (25 participants)
2.5 VII.
Other Administrative Expenses including consumables, printing, publications, books, journals, etc.
VIII.
Miscellaneous and Contingencies 7.0 Total 66.0 Budget Guidelines for existing KP Sl. No.
Item of Expenditure* Project Cost (in lakhs)
B Recurring I.
Manpower 98.4 II.
Travel/ TA/DA III.
Capacity Building workshop for RABI & webinar 4.8 IV.
Utility and maintenance V.
Outreach Campaign &Marketing, networking & publicity 25 | P a g e VI.
Evaluation & Selection of Cohort.
Training Programmes. Events. Exhibitions and seminars, workshops. start-up meets. camps/ meetings etc.
VII.
Workshop for Incubatees /Startups VIII.
Stipend to agripreneurship orientation participants (If conducted on offline mode).
Rs. 10000/- for one months (40 participants).
IX.
Investor's meet X.
Web Based Platform Development and maintenances/need based software. incubator management system, database, etc XI.
Miscellaneous & Contingency, other Administrative Expenses, Exhibitions. printing and publications. reports, books, Journals, etc.
7.8 Total 154.0 * The above Item of Expenditure is indicative only for current financial year. Annual Budget allocation of KP/R-ABI for item wise expenditure may be revised from time to time based on the actual requirement in the subsequent financial year.

26 | P a g e

27 | P a g e Annexure-II Application for Existing Incubator RKVY Agribusiness Incubator (R-ABI) under RKVY Scheme 1.
Name of the R-ABI:
Address :
Phone :
Fax :
E-mail :
Website :
2.
Name, Designation & Contact Details of the R-ABI Head:
Address :
Phone :
Mobile :
Fax :
E-mail :
3.
Executive Summary 4.
Host Institution (HI) Information-General  Please provide details on core activities & resources available.
 List of IP filed/ granted in last five years  List of technologies available for commercialization  Strength of the Institute in hosting RABI 5.
R-ABI Information-General a)
Whether R-ABI is registered as Society/Trust or Section 8 Company:Yes/NO.
If yes, Please enclose the copy of Registration Certificate, Memorandum of Association, and Bye Laws b)
Date of Establishment c)
Source of Funding for the existing Incubator

28 | P a g e d)
Amountof FundingatPresent:
e)
Present Team of R-ABI: - Attach brief profiles, expertise and their contribution to all key staff members of the R-ABI.
Sl.No Name Position Experience Work done f)
Is the R-ABI Head Full Time (W/o) any other responsibility) and what powers given for autonomyofR-ABI g)
Details of Technology commercialization by the Institute h)
Details of Incubation Activities done in last three years Sl.No.
Description 1stYear 2ndYear 3rdYear 1.
Number of Entrepreneurs who approached for incubation 2.
Number of Incubated Startups 3.
Number of Companies Graduated 4.
Services Provided to Incubatees, Pre -Incubation Services Physical Space Technology Support Business Services Support Financial Support Others 5.
No.ofTechnicalMentors,ifany 6.
NoofBusinessMentors, if any i)
Details on programmes organized for Incubation related activities viz. awareness camps, workshops, seminars, startup meet, training, competitions etc. in the last three years.
j)
Notable achievements of existing incubatees and graduated companies, ifany.
k)
Details of Recognitions & Awards won by the existing Incubator.

29 | P a g e 6.
Proposed Thrust Area of Incubation (Please highlight the technology domain that R-ABI would focus on. This should be aligned with the possibility of promoting economically viable startups)
7.
Currently available infrastructure with R-ABI Sl.No.
Description Nos.
Space(sq.mt. /sq. ft.)
1.
IncubationSpace(Cubicles)
2.
Co-workingspace 3.
Labs Facilities/ Pilot Plant/Testing Facility etc.
4.
Conference/meetingRoom 5.
Office Space Any other facility Total Enclose List or labs/Pilot/Testing Facility etc. and equipment.
8. Target-Milestones (Realistic attainable targets)
Outcome 1styear 2ndYear Total No. of new ventures to be admitted for incubation No. of new products/technologies to be developed/innovations to be commercialized No. of conferences/seminars/workshops to be organized/ 4.
No of Startups that required funding 5.
Other Value-added services to be provided (specify))
6.
No of service providers linked with the incubator 7.
No. of ventures to be graduated from the incubator 8.
Training 9.
Internship of agripreneurs with startup

30 | P a g e 9.
Budget S.No.
Item of Expenditure Amount of ₹Lakh A Non-Recurring Renovation/ furnishing of space for Incubation Cubicles and Spaces/ work stations a Interaction Centres/ furniture etc.)
excluding the cost of land & building b Thrust Area Equipment (Equipment/ IT systems etc.
d Office Equipment including state-of-the-art communication network, Video Conferencing Facilities e Conferencing Facilities Contingencies for non-recurring expenditure and other items Total A B Recurring Manpower * (Core Management Team/ Mentors and Tech Support Persons/ Business Development Professionals)/ Consultant Travel Utility and maintenance Marketing, networking & publicity Training Programmes, ADPs, Events, and Seminar, workshops, startupmeets, awareness camps etc.
Other Administrative Expenses including consumables, printing, publications, books, journals, etc.
Miscellaneous and Contingencies Total Recurring Total Project cost(A+B)
10.
Attach endorsement from the Head of the Institutions as given at Annexure-III.

31 | P a g e 11.
RC while recommending sanction of grant to a RABI will take into account funding already received by Eligible Incubator from other Ministries and Departments under similar schemes like DST, BIRAC, MSME, NITI Aayog, DBT, NABARD etc., especially (towards capital expenditure)
Name & Signature of the RABI Head (With seal)
Date:Place:
Name & Signature of the Head of the Institute (With Seal)

32 | P a g e Annexure-III Application for New Incubator RKVY-RAFTAAR-Agribusiness Incubator (R-ABI) under RKVY-RAFTAAR Scheme 1. Executive Summary 2. Name of Host/Promoting Organisation:
Address:
Phone:
E-mail:
Website:
3. Name of theR-ABI:
Address:
Phone:
Email-id:
Website:
4. Name, Designation & contact details of th eR-ABI Head:
Address:
Phone:
E-mail:
5. Executive Summary 6. Host Institute Information a.
Legal Status of the organization (enclose certificate of registration) & whether a National or International organisation b.
Establishment date & summary of registered Objectives c.
Listof Governing Body/Board of Directors d.
Areas of activity e.
List of organizations with which formal MoUs/linkages exist f.
Enclose Annual Audited statement & IT returns for last 3 years For Academic/Research & Development Institutions g.
Number and names of academic departments with the number of associated faculty in the department.
h.
Total student strength (separately for UG/PG/Doctorate courses)

33 | P a g e i.
Total number of teaching and research faculty with PhD qualification ii.
Number of Faculty Research Publications.
iii.
Number of Student Research Publications.
iv.
Details of Patents awarded in the last 5 years.
v.
Details of Recognitions & Awards won.
7. Details on the Host Institution’s strength and preparedness in hosting R-ABI:
A. Strength of the Organisation for carrying out the activity B. What services do you provide? These may could include:
(seed funding, co-location, structured programme, mentoring, cohort-based entry and exit Professional services, networking events.)
C. How will you leverage your networks to deliver services and opportunities to incubatees? Provide evidence of linkages, agreements, and support from other players in the innovation ecosystem.
D. Sources of tapping new incubatee entrepreneurs E. Financial model of the Incubator for operational sustainability after 2 yrs. How will you fund ongoing operations after the grant ends?

34 | P a g e 8. R-ABI Information A. General:
i.
Built-up area to be made available for R-ABI Sl. No.
Description Nos.
Space (sqft.)
Incubation Space (Cubicles)
Co-working Space Lab facilities /PilotPlant /Testing Facility ,etc.
Conference/Meeting Room Office Space Any other facility Total 9. Year-wise work plan for two years (a separate time linked activity chart tobe provided along with the detailed work plan).
10. Target milestones (should be projected based on most likely attain able targets).
Outcome 1styear 2nd Year Total No. of new ventures to be admitted for incubation No. of new products/technologies to be developed/innovations to be commercialized No. of conferences/seminars/ workshops to be organized/ No of service providers linked with the HI No. of ventures to be graduated from the incubator Training Other Value added services to be provided(specify)

35 | P a g e 11. Budget Sl. No.
Item of Expenditure Amount in₹Lakh A Non-Recurring Renovation/furnishing of space for Incubation Cubicles and Spaces/workstations a Interaction Centres/ furnitureetc.)
excluding the cost of land & building b Thrust Area Equipment (Equipment/ /IT systems etc.
d Office Equipment including state-of-the Art communication network, Video Conferencing Facilities e Contingencies for non-recurring Expenditure and other items Total A B Recurring Manpower * (Core Management Team/ Mentors and Tech Support Persons/ Business Development Professionals)/ Consultant Travel Utility and maintenance Marketing, networking & publicity Training Programmes, ADPs, Events, and Seminar, workshops, startup meets, awareness camps, etc.
Other Administrative Expenses including consumables, printing, publications, books, journals, etc Miscellaneous and Contingencies Total Recurring Total Project cost (A+B)

36 | P a g e 12. Revenue generation projections for sustainability of R-ABI Sl. No.
Means of revenue generation 1st 2nd Total Year Year 2 4 Total 13. Attach Endorsement from the Head of the Institution as given at Annexure-IV.
14. RC while recommending sanction of grant to a RABI will take into account funding already received by Eligible Incubator from other Ministries and Departments under similar schemes like DST, BIRAC, MSME, NITI Aayog, DBT, NABARD etc., especially (towards capital expenditure)
Name & Signature of the R-ABI Head (With seal)
Date:
Place:
Name & Signature of the Head of the Institute (WithSeal)

37 | P a g e Annexure IV CERTIFICATE ENDORSEMENT FROM THE HEAD OF THE HOST INSTITUTION We have gone through and agree to abide by the Terms and Conditions of the Nodal Division, DA&FW grant for R-ABI.
We have not submitted, nor do we intend to submit this, or a similar project proposal, to any other agency for financial or other support. In case we submit a proposal to the other agency and get the support, we will keep Division of RKVY, DA&FW informed.
We undertake to submit progress reports, statement(s) of accounts, utilization certificates as required.
Certified that Dr/Shri/Smt.......................... is the R-ABI Head of the proposed R-ABI. The R- ABI Head will assume the responsibility of implementation of the project.
Certified that the hardware, other basic facilities and such other administrative support required for the successful running of R-ABI will be extended to the R-ABI by Host Institute, as per terms and conditions of the grant.
Our institution/agency assures to undertake the complete financial and other management responsibilities of the R-ABI, and successful running of R-ABI for two years of sanction of R-ABI by Nodal Division, DA&FW.
Certified that the minimum period to provide land and building to R-ABI is 15 years and we will continue to provide support beyond this initial period.
If any of the above statements found to be incorrect by Nodal, DA&FW at any point in time, the organization takes the responsibility to refund the entire amount released by Nodal, DA&FW.
Date…………… Name & Signature of the Head of the Institution Place…….

38 | P a g e Annexure-V Application for Agripreneurship Orientation Programme under RKVY Scheme a.
Nameof the applicant:
b. Postal address:
c.
Email:
d. Phone/Mobile Number:
e.
Date of Birth:
f.
Gender:
g. Qualification:
h. Details of Experience if any:
i.
Please attach a concept note of the technology/business idea you propose to pursue.
j.
Describe the innovative elements of the idea along with comparisons with previous reports or products available k.
Please describe the target market opportunities or market for your proposed technology/business idea.
l.
How much money did you invest in developing the plan (if any).
m. How will you generate revenue out of your technology/business idea?
n. How will you ensure the farmer’s outreach of product/services.

39 | P a g e Annexure VI The details of manpower/ resounce person for startup cell of DA&FW for implementation and monitoring of the Innovation and Agri-entrepreneurship program and for operation of KP/R- ABI:
1.
Manpower Details of startup Cell Manpower Monthly emolument (Rs. in Lakh)
Startup Cell Senior Adviser/Sr. Consultant/Domain Expert (01)
2.00 Adviser/Consultant (01)
1.50 Programmer/ Programmer Assistant (01)
0.75 Technical Assistant / Executive (02)
0.70 (each)
*Manpower for Startup Cell will be kept for implementation and monitoring of programme in RKVY Division, DA&FW.
2.
Manpower Details of KP and R-ABI Manpower Monthly emolument (Rs. in Lakh)
KP COO/Bussiness Manager (01)
2.00 Innovation Manager (01)
1.50 Marketing Manager (01)
1.50 Finance Manager (01)
1.50 IP Executive/Legal Executive(01)
0.50 Business Executive (02)
0.50 RABI COO/Business Manager(1)
1.25 Assistant Manager(1)
0.75 Business Executive(1)
0.50 Office Assistant(1)
0.30 An annual increment of 5 per cent for salaried above Rs.1 lakh per month and 7 per cent for salaried below Rs. 1 Lakh per month will be applied to contractual manpower/resource person of Startup Cell/ KP/R-ABI engaged under programme/project.

40 | P a g e All manpower appointed on a salary above Rs. 50,000 per month will be entitled to the Travel rules applied to Level (15600-39100 + GP)
of the central government enterprises/institutions.
1.
Startup Cell-Details of Manpower Requirements Designation Emoluments per month (Rs.
Lakh)
Job Qualification Senior Adviser/Sr.
Consultant/Do main Expert (01) * 2.00 Master degree in Agriculture / MBA/PGDM/ Agri-Business/ or equivalent master degree from UGC recognized institute/ universities.
Minimum 8-10 years experience in implementation assistance /handling of Central Government scheme of agriculture and allied sectors at central level. 2-3 years of experience in handling agri- start-ups related programme at central level.
Desirable: Work experience with incubation sector/ supported incubation/ accelerator programmes; Assessment, examination and evaluation of projects of startups proposals Adviser/Consult ant (01) * 1.50 Master degree in Agriculture / MBA/PGDM/ Agri-Business/ or equivalent master degree from UGC recognized institute/ universities..
Minimum 5-6 years experience in implementation assistance/handling of Central Government scheme of agriculture and allied sectors at central level. 1-2 years of experience in handling agri- start-ups related programme at central level.
Desirable: Work experience with incubation sector/ supported incubation/ accelerator programmes; Assessment , examination and evaluation of projects of startups proposals Programmer/ Programmer Assistant (01)
0.75 MCA/ Equivalent Master degree from recognized university.
Minimum 5-6 years experience in implementation assistance/handling web portal of central governments scheme at central level.
Also 1-2 years of experience. Desirable: Work experience of handling MIS- portal related to startup programme. Good verbal and written communication skills. Strong literacy in computer, MS Office and Internet.
Technical Assistant/ Technical Executive (02)
(02)
0.70 MBA/MBA Agri-business/ MSc Agriculture or Equivalent Master degree from recognized university with minimum 2- 3 years experience in marketing, developing business plan/ assessment and evaluation of startups projects/ entrepreneurship development and well conversant in managing social media.
Good verbal and written communication skills. Strong literacy in computer, MS Office and Internet.
*Upper Age limit will be 50 years for the candidates applying for these posts.
* Selected persons will be entitled to 2 tier AC by train/Economy by air Travel

41 | P a g e 2. KP-Details of Manpower Requirements Designation Emoluments per month (Rs. Lakh)
Job Qualification COO/Bussiness Manager(1) * 2.00 M.Tech/MBA/PGDM/equivalent Master degree in Agriculture/ Agri-Business/ finance/ marketing/ Agri marketing/ Economics/ agri Economics/International Business from UGC recognized institute/ universities.
Minimum 8-10 years in incubation sector/ supported incubation/ accelerator programmes; Assessment and evaluation of projects of startups proposals; mentoring business mentored at least 50-75 startups companies;
facilitated funding support to startups from Angel /VCs.
Manager, Innovation Management /Consultant(1)* 1.50 MTech/ MBA/ PGDM/Equivalent Master degree in Agriculture/Agri-Business/ finance/ marketing/ Agri Marketing/ Agri Economics/ Economics/International Business from UGC recognized institute having experience in at least 5-6 years experience in technology commercialization; supported incubators; Assessment and evaluation of projects startups projects and mentored at least 25-30 startups companies.
Manager, Marketing & Communications //Consultant(1)* 1.50 Professional with MBA/ PGDM/Equivalent Master degree in Agriculture/Agri-Business/ finance/ marketing/IT/ Economics/ Agri Economics/International Business from UGC recognized institute/ universities with minimum 3-5 years of experience in marketing, developing business plan/ assessment and evaluation of startups projects/ entrepreneurship development and well conversant in managing social media.
Manager, Finance & ICT /Consultant(1)* 1.50 Professional with MBA/ PGDM /equivalent Master degree in Agriculture/Agri-Business/ finance/ marketing/ Agri Marketing/ Economics/ Agri Economics/International Business from UGC recognized institute/ universities with minimum 3-5 years of experience in financial consulting;
assessment and evaluation of startups projects; organizing workshops and trainings, awareness programmes to promote Agri- incubation Business Executive /Content Developer(2)
0.50 MBA/MCA/ Mass Communication / Equivalent Master degree from recognized university.Good verbal and written communication skills.
Strong literacy in computer, MS Office and Internet. For Content Developer minimum two year experience in content /article writing will be required.
IP Executive/Legal Executive (1)
0.50 Master’s degree in any branch of science with IP Agent /LLM (IP) with Minimum 2 years of work experience in Patent Drafting, filing, searching, analysis, landscaping/prosecution and license agreement drafting.

42 | P a g e *Upper Age limit will be 50 years for the candidates applying for these posts.
* Selected persons will be entitled to 2 tier AC by train / Economy by air for Travel 3.
Details of Contractual Manpower required for each R-ABI Designation/manpower* Emoluments per month (Rs.inlakh)
Job Qualification COO/Business Manager (1)* 1.25 M.
Tech/MBA/CA/PGDM/Equivalent master degree in Agriculture/ Agri- Business/ Finance/ Commerce/Marketing/Agri Marketing/Agri Economics/Economics/International Business/Technology Commercialization Entrepreneurship from recognized institute- having experience of 3-5 years. Preferably experience in technology commercialization; Investment banking; Banking;
Project appraisal, support incubators;
Assessment and evaluation of projects startups and with experience in startup ecosystem.
AssistantManager/ Consultant(1)* 0.75 M.Tech/ MBA/ CA/ PGDM/ Equivalent master degree in Agriculture/ Agri-Business/ Finance/ Commerce/ Marketing/ Agriculture/ AgriMarketing/ Agri. Economics/ Economics/ International Business/ Technology Commercialization Entrepreneurship from a recognized institute – having experience of 2 – 3 years. Preferably experience in technology commercialization Investment banking;
Banking;
Project appraisal, support in incubators; Assessment and evaluation of projects startups and with experience in startup ecosystem.
Business Executive (l)
0.50 Master degree with IP experience' MBA/MCA/B.Tech /M.Sc./M.A or Equivalent Master degree from recognized university. Good verbal and written communication skills.
Strong literacy in computer, MS Office and Internet.
Technical/ Office Assistant ( 1)
0.30 Graduation in any stream, preferably B.Com/BBA with working know ledge of accounts and computers, including MS office.
*Upper Age limit will be 50 years for the candidates applying for these posts.
* Selected persons will be entitled to 2 tier AC by train / Economy by air for Travel 4. Reimbursement of Hotel Charges to Manpower:
Designation Entitlement of reimbursement of hotel charges/Commercial Guest Houses accommodation Senior Advisor/ Sr. Consultant Rs. 5000/- per day Adviser/ Consultant Rs. 4000/- per day Programmer/ Technical Assistant/ Rs 3000/- per day

43 | P a g e Business Executive (02)
COO/Bussiness Manager Rs. 5000/- per day Manager-Innovation, Manager- Marketing & Communications, Manager- Finance Rs.4000/-perday AssistantManager, Bussiness Executive, Content Developer, IP Executive Rs 3000/- per day