Agriculture & Allied Sector

1. Crops

Key Schemes and Policies

Target Beneficiaries

Farmer Producer Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Organisations Welfare (MoA&FW), Government of India, (FPOs), has announced the Cluster Development Cooperatives/Societie Programme (CDP) for the horticulture

s, Private Enterprise, sector. CDP is designed to leverage the State Agriculture and geographical specialisation of horticulture clusters and promote integrated and market-led development of preproduction, Production, post-harvest, logistics, branding, and marketing activities.
MoA&FW has identified 55 horticulture clusters, of which 12 have been selected for the pilot launch of the Programme.
Under this, financial assistance will be Provided based on the three different categories of clusters as defined above, in terms of - Mega, Midi, and Mini Clusters.

Individual Farmers, | Akola, Amravati, This project is being implemented by Farmer Producer Chhatrapati Government of Maharashtra (GoM) with Organisations, Sambhajinagar, Beed, the assistance of World Bank to enhance Farmers Interest Buldhana, Hingoli, climate-resilience and profitability of small Group, Self Help Jalgaon, Jaina, Latur, holder farming systems in selected districts Groups Nanded, Dharashiv, of the State. This project includes benefit to individual farmers, financial assistance to

Geography

Kisan Credit Card (KCC)
Scheme

National Horticulture Board (NHB)

Registered Society, NGO, Company, Association of Growers/ Industry, SAU/ R&D Institution/ Government/ Public Sector

Parbhani, Wardha, Washim, Yavatmal

All States and Union Territories

All States and Union Territories

farmer producer companies/ farmer group/self-help group, soil and water conservation works, farm schools, capacity building, agro-climatic advisory services, etc.

Pattern of assistance: Project based — 100% and only through Govt.
agency/Public Sector @ Rs.100.00 Lakh ha for effective nursery area including virus indexing, tissue culture lab etc

The Kisan Credit Card scheme aims at providing adequate and timely credit ‘support from the banking system under a single window with the flexible and simplified procedures to the farmers for their cultivation and other needs

Circular:

mmonman/Upload/Engli sh/Notification/PDFs/04

MCKCC03072017.pdf

All States and Union Territories

Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) was launched from Kharif 2016 with aim to support production in agriculture by providing an affordable crop insurance product to ensure comprehensive risk cover for crops of farmers against all non-preventable natural

Under the scheme financial assistance is provided in the form of 100 per cent subsidy to SC & Neo-Buddhist farmers holding land 0.20 ha to six ha and having annual income upto % 1.50 lakh, with an objective to provide sustainable irrigation facility such as new well (for new well minimum 0.40 ha land is essential), old well repairing, plastification of farm pond, inwell boring, pumpset, electric connection charges, micro irrigation set, etc

Scheduled Tribe (ST)
farmers in Maharashtra

Under the scheme financial assistance is Provided in the form of 100 per cent subsidy to ST farmers holding land 0.20 ha to six ha and having annual income upto = 1.50 lakh, with an objective to provide sustainable irrigation facility such as new well (for new well minimum 0.40 ha land is essential), old well repairing, plastification of farm pond, inwell boring, pumpset, electric connection charges, HDPE/PVC etc

All States and Union Territories

The objective of Pradhan Mantri Kisan ‘Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN) scheme is to augment the income of small & marginal farmers. Under this scheme, eligible farmers’ families (husband, wife, and

All States and Union Territories

All States and Union Territories

children below 18 years of age) get % 6,000 in three equal installments of % 2,000 each and the amount is credited directly into their Aadhaar linked bank accounts

Pradhan Mantri Kisan Maandhan Yojana (PMKMY), a voluntary and contribution- based pension scheme, has been initiated in the State to provide old age protection and social security to all small & marginal farmers. Under the scheme, a fixed pension of % 3,000 per month is to be given to all eligible small and marginal farmers.

mKisan portal is mobile based service which enables farmers and all other ‘stakeholders to obtain advisories and information on agricultural meteorological advisory, hurricane, crop & pest infestation, crop insurance, market price, etc. being ‘sent by experts and government organisations at different levels through mKisan portal free of cost.

All States and Union Territories

e-NAM, a pan-india electronic trading portal launched in 2016, helps to directly connect APMC mandis which can be accessed online. This provides a single window service for all APMC related information & services including information on commodity arrivals & prices, buy & sell trade offers, provision to respond to trade offers. An online market facility Teduces transaction costs and information

All States and Union Territories

asymmetry. In all 118 APMCs in the State have been included under e-NAM

Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana was launched in 2007-08 with the aim of holistic development of agriculture and allied sectors. Since 2017-18 this scheme is being implemented as RKVY-RAFTAAR with an objective of making farming a remunerative economic activity through strengthening farmers’ efforts, risk mitigation and promoting agri-business entrepreneurship. This Scheme is being implemented from the year 2022-23 as RVKY-Cafeteria. It includes two streams viz. Annual Action Plan (AAP) and Detailed Project Report (DPR). Under AAP based stream, (i) Per Drop More Crop (Micro irrigation), (li) Sub Mission on Agriculture Mechanisation, (iii) Rainfed Area Development, (iv) Soil Helath Card & Management, (v) Organic Farming (Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana) are included. Under DPR stream, 70 per cent grant is reserved for growth in production, infrastructure & assets to states, 20 per cent for special sub-schemes of national priority under RKVY-Cafeteria and 10 per cent for innovation & agri-entrepreneurship development projects

All States and Union Territories

Rainfed agriculture is risk prone activity mainly due to its dependence on climate.
Objective of Rainfed Area Development

programme is to minimise risk by providing agriculture-based income generating opportunities and sustaining the rainfed agriculture through optimum utilisation of potential of natural resources and resources created through various interventions

Soil Health Card (SHC)
Scheme under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY)

All States and Union Territories

All States and Union Territories

Distribution of Soil Health Cards (SHCs) is implemented to promote integrated nutrient management for maintaining soil health and improving soil fertility. SHCs are being distributed to farmers in phases to create awareness about soil health status and suggest measures to improve soil health

The objectives of Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) are (i) enhancing soil fertility and producing healthy food through organic practices without use of chemicals, (ii) empowering farmers through cluster approach in farm practice management, (iii) quality assurance and (iv) direct marketing of agriculture produce through

innovative means

All States and Union Territories

Main objectives of NFSM are to increase production of rice, wheat, pulses, coarse cereals and nutri-cereals through area expansion & productivity enhancement in a sustainable manner, restoring soil fertility and productivity at the individual farm level

All States and Union Territories

All States and Union Territories

and enhancing farm level economy to Testore confidence amongst the farmers

"Green Revolution — Krishonnati Yojana” is an Umbrella Scheme for the agriculture sector that has been implemented since 2016-17 by clubbing several schemes/missions under one umbrella scheme. The Sub-Mission on Seeds and Planting Material (SMSP) aims to increase the production of certified / quality seed, increase SRR, upgrade the quality of farm- saved seeds, strengthen the seed multiplication chain, promote new technologies and methodologies in seed production, processing, testing, etc., to

strengthen and modemizing infrastructure and quality, etc.

"Green Revolution — Krishonnati Yojana” is an Umbrella Scheme for the agriculture sector that has been implemented since 2016-17 by clubbing several schemes/missions under one umbrella scheme. Under this scheme, financial assistance on production of seeds, seed Certification, farmers training, seed processing and seed storage godowns

CROPSAP is online, realtime Crop Pest Management Advisory Project which is being implemented in collaboration with Indian Council of Agricultural Research Institute and agriculture universities in the

State. The objectives of the project are (i)
surveillance of pest & diseases of major crops and provide advisories for management of pest & diseases, (ii) to create awareness among the farmers regarding pest & diseases management, (iii) to provide bio/chemical pesticides on ‘subsidy basis to the farmers in critical situation. The project covers Paddy, Soyabean, Cotton, Tur, Gram, Maize, Sorghum and Sugarcane

GoM is implementing this 100 per cent subsidy scheme from kharif season of 2018-19 in the State for farmers not registered under MGNREGA. The objectives of the scheme are to enhance income of farmers, create employment for young farmers, change cropping pattern, create a sustainable source of income and increase production of raw materials required for agro-processing industries.
This scheme covers plantation of 16 perennial horticulture crops.

Key Reports & Documents

Report/Document Overview

Agricultural Statistics at a Glance’ is a flagship publication of the Economics & Statistics Division of the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare. It provides a comprehensive and updated data on important parameters, like area, production and productivity of various crops across States, land-use statistics, price support and procurement, international trade, credit, insurance, rainfall, etc. This publication is widely used as the most trusted source of information on various aspects of agriculture and allied sector by policy makers, farmers, researchers, scientists, administrators, trade, industry, statisticians, economists and the general public.

Pocket Book of Agricultural Statistics has been enriched with the updated information on various new initiatives of the Government, viz., Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY), Soil Health Card Scheme, Micro Irrigation, etc. It also includes latest international statistics on agriculture sector to provide a global perspective, in addition to demand- supply projections of agricultural commodities, trend in inflation of agricultural commodities, results of the Livestock Census 2019, etc.

The Economics and Statistics Division, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare has been bringing out a publication on "Agricultural Prices in India” regularly. This Publication gives information on Index Numbers of Wholesale Prices, Consumer Price Index Numbers for

Report/Document Overview

Wholesale and Retail Prices of various agricultural commodities. The present volume contains information on monthly index of various agricultural commodities, cash crops, sugar and edible oils, statistics on wholesale prices of 92 commodities and retail prices of 27 agricultural commodities compiled on the basis of information collected from different States and Union Territories.

Farm Harvest Prices

of Principal Crops in India 2021-22

Farm Harvest Prices of Principal Crops in India" is a Publication which is being brought out every year by the Economics and Statistics Division of the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare. The volume contains information on Farm Harvest Prices of 36 principal agricultural crops for the year 2021-22, which have been compiled on the basis of information shared by all States and

Union Territories. The agricultural crops covered are Paddy, Rice, Jowar, Bajra, Maize, Ragi, Wheat, Barley, Gram, Arhar, Sugar Raw (Gur), Sugarcane, Potato, Tobacco, Groundnut, Rapeseed, Sesamum, Linseed, Castor seed, Nigerseed, Soyabean, Sunflower, Cotton, Jute, Sannhemp, Mesta, Pepper, Ginger, Chilli, Turmeric, Arecanut, Banana, Tapioca, Coconut, Toria and Cashewnut.

FHP-Publii

ANNUAL REPORT 2022-23

Annual Report provided by Department of Agriculture and Farmers welfare gives detailed information about the overview of the department, its functions and organizational structure, different schemes of agriculture ministry, Audit observations, and departmental accounting organization etc.

Report/Document Overview

Maharashtra State

The main objective of Handbook of Basic Statistics of Maharashtra State publication is to present up-to-date statistical data on various socioeconomic aspects of State Economy in a concise form.

Maharashtra's Economy in Figures report gives overview of multiple indicators which are part of Maharashtra’s economy.

The publication titled ‘Success Stories of Progressive Women Farmers and Agripreneurs' has been compiled by the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare to voice the

attainments of outstanding and inspirational women farmers and agripreneurs. Documenting and disseminating success stories of farmers inspires millions of fellow farmers as well as motivates them and enhance their self confidence leading to agripreneurship.

MahaEcoind 2022.paf (maharashtra.gov.in)

OUTPUT-OUTCOME MONITORING FRAMEWORK - 2022-23

Output-outcome monitoring framework report includes output and outcome data of the schemes with financial outlays less than 500 crore, 500 crore and more than 500 crore for the year 2022-23 of the department of agriculture and farmers welfare.

OQOMF 2022-23,

Name of the Report/Document

Report/Document Overview

NITI Aayog Annual Report 2022-2023

The NITI Aayog serves as the apex public policy think tank of the Government of India, and the nodal agency tasked with Catalysing economic development, and fostering cooperative federalism through the involvement of State Governments of India in the economic policy-making process using a bottom- up approach. This Report is published by NITI Aayog provides detailed information about framework of NITI Aayog, policies and programmes implemented by it, monitoring and evaluation details, think tank activities and sectoral achievements, etc.

NITI Aayog, Government of India

NITI Aayog,

“Best practices in social sector: A compendium, 2023” has been prepared under the guidance and support of National Institution for Transforming India (NITI Aayog), Government of India and United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The preparation of the compendium entailed extensive data collection from across 28 States and 8 Union Territories in India. It provides information about best practices under different social sectors in India.

NITI Aayog has prepared this compendium of best practices from States/UTs covering effective policies for promoting millets and including them in the Integrated Child Development Services program as well as research and technology related innovations. The compendium is the result of a collaborative effort between NIT! Aayog and various central and state government departments, technical experts and civil society organizations.

‘AIM-UNCDF White paper on ‘GEARING UP TO SOLVE FOOD SECURITY CHALLENGES’

UNCDF and Atal Innovation Mission, NITI Aayog, Government of

The white paper is the result of experience working with start-ups in agritech sector while implementing the Agritech Challenge in partnership with Atal Innovation Mission, India (AIM). This white paper highlights the challenges and opportunities faced by Indian agritech start-ups and the role of the Government of india (Gol). It suggests a significant role in solving challenges faced by the start-ups and

Report/Document Overview

Agricultural challenges and Policies for the 21st Century

NITI Aayog, Government of India

facilitating these start-ups at the national and international levels as a partner. It presents steps for making India not only an Agritech innovation hub but also a global leader in sharing and expanding these innovations to the least developed countries in Asia and Africa.

This document is prepared by NIT! Aayog to showcase the success stories of innovators and entrepreneurs belonging to agri and allied sector who are working towards capturing realistic ideas and converting them into real innovations.

The paper begins by examining the severity and extent of various types of challenges confronting Indian agriculture, ranging from over exploitation of natural resources to ‘smallholder viability to agricultural research and development. It then highlights key policies and initiatives that can be put in place to address these issues. While discussing the policies, the author thoroughly reviewed the current agri-marketing and MSP policies and tried to provide solutions to major problems under the current policy setup.
At the end, the author discusses various issues that must be debated to ensure sustainability of all the stakeholders in agricultural sector.

By showing that India’s path of structural transformation is unsustainable, this paper calls for a new paradigm in Indian agriculture through the adoption of agroecological principles at scale. The paper then examines the challenges agriculture in India faces in raising productivity. This paper demonstrates the imbalance in fertiliser use at the state-leve and demonstrates the alarming level of water extraction, in the most productive states. Based on these discussions, the Paper concludes that India faces the twin challenges of improving productivity, but also doing it in an environmentally

‘Compendium-of-75-agri-entrerenuer.pdf (niti.gov.in)

Report/Document Overview

friendly manner, which the current system of production is at odds with.

This article is written by Dr. Neelam Patel and Dr. Tanu Sethi focusing on rural women who are torchbearers for social, economic and environment transformation for the ‘New India’. In India, Agriculture employs about 80 percent of rural women. Empowering and mainstreaming rural women workforce in agriculture can bring paradigm shift towards economic growth. The article expiains how it will enhance food and nutrition security and alleviate poverty and hunger.

This article is written by Naman Agrawal and Himanshu Agrawal focusing on automation in agriculture as emerging ‘subject across world. Artificial intelligence has been seeing a lot of direct application in farming and this article gives overview regarding use of Al in farming.

Rural Women Neelam Tanu article 03032022.paf (niti.gov.in)

2. Agro & Food Processing

Key Schemes and Policies

Name of the Implementing Scheme Overview Scheme Department Maharashtra Maharashtra Maharashtra Agribusiness Network (MAGNET), a Agribusiness State Agricultural project of Government of Maharashtra assisted by Network Marketing Board Asian Development Bank (ADB), intends to increase (MAGNET) (MSAMB) income of small and marginal farmers in the State.
The project focuses on selective focus horticultural Orange, Custard Apple, Guava, Sapota, Strawberry, Okra, Chilly (Green & Red), Flowers, Mango, Lemon, Cashew Nut and Snake Gourd.

The project provides matching grant upto 60% of eligible project cost or Rs. 6 crores (whichever is lesser) for setting up integrated post-harvest infrastructure on focused crops to Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) and Private Players.

Agriculture Agriculture Infrastructure Fund is a central sector Infrastructure scheme that will enable a financing facility of Rs.1 Fund (AIF) lakh crore for funding agriculture infrastructure projects at farm-gate and aggregation points such as farmers producers organisations, primary agricultural cooperatives, startups and entrepreneurs in the agriculture sector. The scheme provides medium to long term debt financing facility for investment in viable projects for post-harvest management infrastructure and community farming assets through interest subvention and financial support/credit guarantee.

Scheme Overview

Operation Greens under Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY)

“Operation Greens” was announced on the line of “Operation Flood” to promote Farmer Producers Organizations (FPOs), Agri-logistics, Processing facilities and Professional management. The projects will be eligible for Grants-in-aid at 35% of eligible project cost for projects in General Areas and at 50% of eligible project cost for projects in Difficult Areas as well as for projects of SC/ST, FPOs and SHGs

The scheme aims at development of modern infrastructure and common facilities to encourage group of entrepreneurs to set up food processing units based on cluster approach by linking groups of producers/ farmers to the processors and markets through well-equipped supply chain with modem infrastructure. The projects will be eligible for Grants- in-aid at 35% of eligible project cost for projects in General Areas and at 50% of eligible project cost for projects in Difficult Areas as well as for projects of SC/ST, FPOs and SHGs subject to maximum of Rs.
10 crore.

All States and Union Territories

The main objective of the scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food Processing &

Preservation Capacities is creation of processing and preservation capacities and modernization/expansion

Scheme Overview

of existing food processing units which will help in increasing the level of processing, value addition and thereby lead to reduction in food loss and result in enhancement of farmers’ income. The projects will be eligible for Grants-in-aid at 35% of eligible project cost for projects in General Areas and at 50% of eligible project cost for projects in Difficult Areas as well as for projects of SC/ST, FPOs and SHGs subject to maximum of Rs. 5 crore.

Farmer Producer Organizations, Producer Cooperatives, Private Enterprises, NGOs, Central and State PSUs

The objective of the Scheme of “Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure” is to provide integrated cold chain and preservation and value addition infrastructure facilities, without any break, from the farm gate to the consumer in order to.
reduce post-harvest losses of non-horticulture produce, dairy, meal, poultry, and marine/fish (except shrimp), dairy, meat and poultry. This will enable linking producers to food processors and market through a well-equipped supply chain and cold chain, thereby ensuring remunerative prices to farmers and year-round availability of food products to consumers. The projects will be eligible for Grants-in- aid at 35% of eligible project cost for projects in General Areas and at 50% of eligible project cost for projects in Difficult Areas as well as for projects of SC/ST, FPOs and SHGs subject to maximum of Rs.
10 crore.

To strengthen the food quality control infrastructure and to make it available to the food processing sector and other stakeholders in order to ensure compliance to domestic and international food safety standards

Scheme Overview

Support to Individual Micro Enterprises under Pradhan Mantri Formalisation of Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME)
scheme

SHGs, FPOs, FPCs, FIGs, etc., and societies, firms, companies, etc. in the field

and also to reduce turmaround time (TAT) for analysis of food samples.

The National Beekeeping and Honey Mission was announced by the Union Government as part of the Atma Nirbhar Bharat package in 2020 and it is implemented by the National Bee Board (NBB) and is approved for three years from 2020 to 2023. The scheme Is aimed at the overall development and promotion of scientific beekeeping in India to achieve the objectives of the Sweet Revolution. It is a central sector scheme (100% central government funding).

Pradhan Mantri Formalisation of Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME) is a centrally sponsored scheme that is designed to address the challenges faced by the micro enterprises and to tap the potential of groups and cooperatives in supporting the upgradation and formalization of these enterprises. Under the scheme, 2,00,000 micro food processing units will be directly assisted with credit linked subsidy. Adequate supportive common infrastructure and institutional architecture will be supported to accelerate growth of the sector.

Individual micro food processing units would be provided credit-linked capital subsidy @35% of the eligible project cost with a maximum ceiling of Rs. 10.0 lakh per unit.

Scheme Overview

(PMFME)
scheme

The Scheme would support clusters and groups such as FPOs/SHGs/ producer cooperatives, Private Enterprises along their entire value chain for sorting, grading, warehouse and cold storage at the farm-gate.
The grant will be 35% with credit linkage

Seed Capital to SHG under Pradhan Mantri Formalisation of Micro Food

Processing Enterprises

Seed capital at Rs. 40,000/- per member of SHG for working capital and purchase of small tools would be provided under this scheme.

Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (MoA&FW), Government of India, has announced the Cluster Development Programme (CDP) for the horticulture sector. CDP is designed to leverage the geographical specialisation of horticulture clusters and promote integrated and market-led development of preproduction, production, post-harvest, logistics, branding, and marketing activities. MoA&FW has identified 55 horticulture clusters, of which 12 have been selected for the pilot launch of the Programme.
Under this, financial assistance will be provided based on the three different categories of clusters as

Scheme Overview

(FPO), Cluster Level Federations, Community Managed Resource Centres

Maharashtra (All districts)

defined above, in terms of - Mega, Midi, and Mini Clusters.

Government of Maharashtra (GoM) has launched this project with the financial support of World Bank from 2020-21. The main objective of the project is to support development of inclusive and competitive agriculture value chains, focusing on small holder farmers and agri-entrepreneurs in the state

Credit linked projects relating to Cold Storages including Controlled Atmosphere (CA) and their modernization are eligible for assistance under this component. The assistance will be given as subsidy @ 35% of the capital cost of project in general areas and 50% in case of NE, Hilly States & Scheduled Areas for a storage capacity above 5000 MT up to 10000 MT

The Maharashtra State Agriculture Export Policy is framed with a focus on agriculture export-oriented production, export promotion, better farmer realization and synchronization within policies and programs of Government of India and Government of Maharashtra. It is focused to have a “Farmers’ Centric Approach” for improved income through active involvement of farmers in export.

Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana was launched in 2007- 08 with the aim of holistic development of agriculture and allied sectors. Since 2017-18 this scheme is being implemented as RKVY-RAFTAAR with an

Scheme Overview

objective of making farming a remunerative economic activity through strengthening farmers’ efforts, risk mitigation and promoting agri-business entrepreneurship. This Scheme is being implemented from the year 2022-23 as RVKY-Cafeteria. It includes two streams viz. Annual Action Plan (AAP) and Detailed Project Report (DPR). Under AAP based stream, (i) Per Drop More Crop (Micro irrigation), (ii)
Sub Mission on Agriculture Mechanisation, (ili)
Rainfed Area Development, (iv) Soil Helath Card & Management, (v) Organic Farming (Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana) are included. Under DPR stream, 70 per cent grant is reserved for growth in production, infrastructure & assets to states, 20 per cent for special sub-schemes of national priority under RKVY-Cafeteria and 10 per cent for innovation & agri-entrepreneurship development projects

Scheme Guidelines:

RKVY 14th Fin. C omm.pat

Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA), Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of India

The Financial Assistance Scheme (FAS) is an export promotion scheme run by APEDA. The scheme aims to facilitate the export of agri-products by providing assistance to exporters through understanding the several challenges faced by agri-exporters. Financial assistance is also provided in three broad areas, namely: Development of Export Infrastructure, Quality Development and Market Development.

3. Livestock

Key Schemes and Policies

Husbandry Infrastructure Development Fund (AHIDF)

Farmer Producer

Organization (FPO),

Private companies, Individual

The Animal Husbandry Infrastructure Development Fund (AHIDF) is a central sector scheme under the Hon'ble Prime Minister's Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan stimulus package of Rs.15000 crore for incentivizing investments in

(i) Dairy processing and value addition infrastructure,

(li) Meat processing and value addition infrastructure and

(ili) Animal feed plant (however, Aqua feed is not eligible)

(iv) Breed Improvement technology and Breed Multiplication Farm

(v) Animal Waste to Wealth Management (Agri Waste Management)

(vi) Setting up of VeterinaryVaccine and Drugs Manufacturing facilities

Geography

All States and Union Territories

The Rashtriya Gokul Mission (RGM) is being implemented for development and conservation of indigenous bovine breeds since December 2014. The scheme is important in enhancing milk production and productivity of bovines to meet growing demand of milk and making dairying more remunerative to the rural farmers of the country. The scheme is also continued under umbrella scheme Rashtriya Pashudhan Vikas Yojna from 2021 to 2026 with a budget outlay of Rs.2400 crore.

Individual, SHGs, FPOs, FCOs, JLGs, Section 8 companies, Entrepreneurs, Dairy Cooperative, ICAR, Central Institutes, State Government University farms and other credible institutions and Start Ups.

The Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying, Government of India is implementing the scheme of National Livestock Mission since the financial year 2014-15. The scheme of National Livestock Mission (NLM) aims towards employment generation, entrepreneurship development, increase in per animal productivity and thus targeting increased production of meat, goat milk, egg and wool under the umbrella scheme Development

State Cooperative Dairy Federations, District Cooperative Milk Producers’ Union, SHG run private dairy, Milk Producer Companies, Farmer Producer Organisations etc.

Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder development

‘Sub-Mission on Extension

National Animal Disease Control NADCP Guidelines:

Minister in September, 2019 for control of Foot & Mouth Disease and Brucellosis by vaccinating 100% cattle, buffalo, sheep, goat and pig population for FMD and 100% bovine female calves of 4-8 months of age for

brucellosis with the total outlay of Rs.13, 343.00 crore for five years (2019-20 to 2023-24).

National Programme for Dairy NPDD Guidelines:

Development (NPDD) aims to

enclosure_NPDD+quidelines compres enhance quality of milk and milk ure Ni nica

sed.pdf (dahd.nic.in)
products and increase share of

organised procurement, processing, value addition and marketing. The scheme will be implemented across the country for the period of five year from 2021-22 to 2025-26. The scheme has two components:
Component A- focuses towards creating/strengthening of infrastructure

for quality milk testing equipment as well as primary chilling facilities.

Component B-(Dairying Through Cooperatives) provides financial assistance from Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) for selected states.

Dairy processing & Infrastructure it Fund (DIDF)

Co-operative Milk Unions, State Cooperative Dairy Federations, Multi ‘State Milk

Cooperatives, Milk

Dairy Processing & Infrastructure Development Fund has been set up to modemize the milk processing plants and machinery and to create additional infrastructure for processing more milk with a corpus of Rs. 8,004 crore with National Bank for

Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD). The project focuses on building an efficient milk procurement system by setting up of processing and chilling infrastructure & installation of electronic milk adulteration testing equipment at village level.

DIDF Guidelines:

Adimistrative-Approval-DIDF2021- 22__0.pdf (dahd.nic.in,

The overall aim of the Livestock Health & Disease Control scheme is to improve the animal health sector by way of implementation of prophylactic vaccination programmes against various diseases of livestock and Poultry, capacity building, disease

Chief Minister Animal Health Scheme

Punyashloka Nomadic Tribes-C

surveillance and strengthening of the veterinary infrastructure.

Chief Minister Animal Health Scheme aims at establishing mobile veterinary clinics in rural areas to provide veterinary services to remote, hilly and tribal villages. Farmers/livestock owners get medical treatment for their animals at their doorstep through these mobile veterinary health clinics.
These veterinary clinics also provide services like preventive vaccination, artificial insemination, guidance regarding diet & health of animals and information about various schemes.

Raje Yashwantrao Holkar Mahamesh.
Yojana aims at promotion of sheep rearing for Nomadic Tribes-C beneficiaries. Under the scheme, 75 per cent subsidy is given for sheep unit (20 females + one male), distribution of improved male sheep, providing infrastructure for sheep rearing & balanced feed for each sheep unit and 50 per cent subsidy given for purchasing of mini silage baler-cum-wrapper machine & installation of animal feed units.

Key Reports & Documents

The main objective of Handbook of Basic Statistics of Maharashtra State publication is to present up-to-date statistical data on various socio-economic aspects of State Economy in a concise form.

Annual Report 2022-23

ACCOUNTS ATA GLANCE

‘Annual report includes overview of achievements, organizational structure and development of cattle, dairy etc. of department of animal husbandry. It mentions that livestock production and agriculture are intrinsically linked, each being dependent on the other, and both crucial for overall food security. Livestock sector is an important sub-sector of the agriculture in Indian economy.

This document provides a broad overview of the activities of the Ministry. It is based on information contained in Appropriation Accounts, Finance Accounts, Statement of Central Transactions (SCT) and e-Lekha for the financial year 2021-22. Accounts at a Glance is prepared annually with the objective of providing a macro level summary of the accounts of the Ministry/Department under our payment control.

Maharashtra's Economy in Figures

Maharashtra's Economy in Figures report gives overview of multiple indicators which are part of Maharashtra’s economy.

MahaEcolnd_2022.pdf (maharashtra.gov.in)

Telemedicine for Livestock Health & Safety document provides a broad overview about need of telemedicine for livestock, guidelines for telemedicine for livestock and framework for telemedicine for livestock in India etc.

Compendium of 75 Agri Entrepreneurs and Innovators

This document is prepared by NITI Aayog to showcase the success stories of innovators and entrepreneurs belonging to agri_| (niti.cov.in)
and allied sector who are working towards capturing realistic ideas

and converting them into real innovations.

India’s White Revolution Achievements and the Next Phase

This paper discusses and compare achievements of white and

green revolution and significant developments in other segments | (niti.gov.in)
of agriculture to draw lessons for future growth and development

of dairy sector. The second part of the paper briefly presents the

roadmap and vision for the next phase of dairy sector.

4. Fishing & Aquaculture

Key Schemes and Policies

Target Beneficiaries

‘Scheme Overview

Relevant Links

Fisheries And Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF)

Fishers, Fish farmers, Fish workers, Fish vendors, Fisheries Development corporations, Self Help Groups (SHGs)/Joint Liability Groups (JLGs) in the fisheries sector, Fisheries cooperatives, Fisheries Federations, Entrepreneurs and private firms, Fish Farmers Producer Organisations/Companies

(including FISHCOPFED collective groups of fish farmers & fish produce

The PMMSY is an umbrella scheme of the Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Government of India which is designed to address critical gaps in fish production and productivity, quality, technology, post-harvest infrastructure and management, modemisation and strengthening of value chain, traceability, establishing a robust fisheries management framework and fishers” welfare with an estimated investment of Rs. 20,050 crores for the period of five years (FY 2020- 21 to FY 2024-25).

Government of India encourages private entrepreneurs and fish farmers in creation of fisheries infrastructure facilities. To achieve 20 million tonnes of fish production by 2022-23, Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) was created with an estimated fund outlay of Rs 7522.48 Crore which envisages creation of fisheries infrastructure facilities both in

PMMSY Guidelines:
https://nfdb.gov.in/PDF/PMMSY >Guidelines24-June2020.paf

FIDF Guidelines:
https://dof.gov.in/sites/default/fil

Target Beneficiaries

Institutions/Self Help Groups (SHGs)/ NGOs, SCs/STs/Marginal Farmers,

Individual farmers owning The State of Maharashtra is Guidelines Brochure:
less than one acre of implementing Mangrove

mangrove land, fishermen, Conservation and Livelihood SaehfFs1 Pamphlet Brochure SHGs, Marginal farmers Generation Scheme since 2017 420mm X 297mm communities across coastal stretch

of the State for upscaling various

livelihood activities such as Mud

Crab Farming, Fish Cage Culture,

Oyster & Mussel Farming,

Omamental Fish Culture, Eco-

tourism and mangrove plantation

under the scheme.

Key Reports & Documents

Handbook of Basic Statistics of Maharashtra State

The Director of Economics and

Statistics, Planning Department, Government of Maharashtra

The main objective of Handbook of Basic Statistics of Maharashtra State publication is to present up-to-date statistical data on various socioeconomic aspects of State Economy in a concise form.

ACCOUNTS ATA GLANCE

Chief Controller of Accounts, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying, Government Of india

Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying, Government of India

‘Accounts at a Glance of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying for the financial year 2021-22. This document provides a broad overview of the activities of the Ministry. It is based on information contained in Appropriation Accounts, Finance Accounts, Statement of Central Transactions (SCT) and e-Lekha for the financial year 2021- 22. Accounts at a Glance is prepared annually with the ‘objective of providing a macro level summary of the accounts of the Ministry/Department under our payment control.

Annual report of the department of fisheries gives overview

FOR THE OFFICE USE ONLY (dof.gov.in)

Directorate of Economics & Statistics, Government of Maharashtra

Maharashtra's Economy in Figures report gives overview of multiple indicators which are part of Maharashtra’s economy.

MahaEcoind_2022.pdf (maharashtra.gov.in)

NITI Aayog, Government of India

This document is prepared by NITI Aayog to showcase the success stories of innovators and entrepreneurs belonging to agri and allied sector who are working towards capturing realistic ideas and converting them into real innovations.

Compendium-of-75-agri-entrerenuer pdf (niti.gov.in)