Brief on Sub Mission on Agroforestry Scheme

NRM Division of DAC and FW is implementing Sub-Mission on Agroforestry (SMAF under National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) since 2016-17 as part of the recommendation of the National Agroforestry Policy 2014 to promote plantation on farmlands. The scheme is being implemented in the 20 States and 2 UTs which have liberalized transit regulations for selected tree species including state of Madhya Pradesh. The mission interventions has main objectives to expand coverage under Trees Plantation suited to local agro -climatic condition, growing tress on farmlands, Peripheral and Boundary Plantations and Promoting various Agro forestry practices/models suited to different agro ecological regions and land use conditions that will enhance livelihood resources by creating additional income opportunities for farmers; Bio-diversity/Environmental protection and supplement to livestock farming; Help facilitate Adaptation and Mitigation efforts in climate change and Productive use of waste and degraded lands.

The Scheme was launched with following major objectives and interventions.
I.
Major Objectives:
 To encourage and expand tree plantation in complimentary and integrated manner with crops and livestock on farm land.
 To ensure availability of quality planting material.
 To popularise various Agroforestry practices/models.
 To create database, information and knowledge support in the area of Agroforestry.
 To provide extension and capacity building support to Agroforestry sector.

II.
Mission Interventions are:

 Nursery Development for Quality planting material (NDQPM)
 Peripheral and Boundary Plantation (PBP)
 Low Density Plantation on Farm lands ( LDPFL)
 High Density Block Plantation (HDBP)
 Capacity Building & Trainings

 Demonstration of Agroforestry Models.

III.
Funding Pattern:
Scheme is being implemented with funding pattern of 60:40 between Centre and State Govt. for all States excepting NE & Hilly states, where it would be 90:10 and 100% in case of UTs & National Level Agencies.
IV.
Implementing States:

The scheme is being implemented in the States which have liberalized transit regulations for selected tree species. At present scheme is being implemented in 20 States namely i.e. Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattishgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh and UT of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh.
Agroforestry helps in creating additional source of income to farmers and also help in carbon sequestration.
Under the Mission, multipurpose tree species with short, medium and long term returns are encouraged, so that farmers may get additional income at regular intervals.